Background Two weeks’ isolation is widely recommended for people commencing treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). The evidence that this corresponds to clearance of potentially infectious tuberculous mycobacteria in sputum is not well established. This World Health Organization–commissioned review investigated sputum sterilisation dynamics during TB treatment. Methods and findings For the main analysis, 2 systematic literature searches of OvidSP MEDLINE, Embase, and Global Health, and EBSCO CINAHL Plus were conducted to identify studies with data on TB infectiousness (all studies to search date, 1 December 2017) and all randomised controlled trials (RCTs) for drug-susceptible TB (from 1 January 1990 to search date, 20 February 2018). Included articles reported on patients receiving effective treatment for culture-confirmed drug-susceptible pulmonary TB. The outcome of interest was sputum bacteriological conversion: the proportion of patients having converted by a defined time point or a summary measure of time to conversion, assessed by smear or culture. Any study design with 10 or more particpants was considered. Record sifting and data extraction were performed in duplicate. Random effects meta-analyses were performed. A narrative summary additionally describes the results of a systematic search for data evaluating infectiousness from humans to experimental animals (PubMed, all studies to 27 March 2018). Other evidence on duration of infectiousness—including studies reporting on cough dynamics, human tuberculin skin test conversion, or early bactericidal activity of TB treatments—was outside the scope of this review. The literature search was repeated on 22 November 2020, at the request of the editors, to identify studies published after the previous censor date. Four small studies reporting 3 different outcome measures were identified, which included no data that would alter the findings of the review; they are not included in the meta-analyses. Of 5,290 identified records, 44 were included. Twenty-seven (61%) were RCTs and 17 (39%) were cohort studies. Thirteen studies (30%) reported data from Africa, 12 (27%) from Asia, 6 (14%) from South America, 5 (11%) from North America, and 4 (9%) from Europe. Four studies reported data from multiple continents. Summary estimates suggested smear conversion in 9% of patients at 2 weeks (95% CI 3%–24%, 1 single study [ N = 1]), and 82% of patients at 2 months of treatment (95% CI 78%–86%, N = 10). Among baseline smear-positive patients, solid culture conversion occurred by 2 weeks in 5% (95% CI 0%–14%, N = 2), increasing to 88% at 2 months (95% CI 84%–92%, N = 20). At equivalent time points, liquid culture conversion was achieved in 3% (95% CI 1%–16%, N = 1) and 59% (95% CI 47%–70%, N = 8). Significant heterogeneity was observed. Further interrogation of the data to explain this heterogeneity was limited by the lack of disaggregation of results, including by factors such as HIV status, baseline smear status, and the presence or absence of lung cavitation. Conclusions This systematic review found that most patients remained culture positive at 2 weeks of TB treatment, challenging the view that individuals are not infectious after this interval. Culture positivity is, however, only 1 component of infectiousness, with reduced cough frequency and aerosol generation after TB treatment initiation likely to also be important. Studies that integrate our findings with data on cough dynamics could provide a more complete perspective on potential transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by individuals on treatment. Trial registration Systematic review registration: PROSPERO 85226 . Author summary Why was this study done? Though cited in many countries’ national guidance, the evidence that individuals with pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) are rendered non-infectious by 2 weeks of effective TB treatment is challenged. This systematic review was commissioned by the World Health Organization to provide evidence to inform TB infection prevention and control guidelines. We sought to synthesise the available data on the clearance of potentially infectious TB bacteria from the sputum of patients after starting effective treatment. What did the researchers do and find? We performed systematic searches of literature databases to identify relevant articles, using predetermined inclusion criteria. Extracted data were synthesised using narrative summaries and meta-analyses. A minority of patients had clearance of TB bacteria from sputum at 2 weeks of effective treatment, as assessed by either sputum smear or culture. As expected, the proportion having cleared TB bacteria from sputum increased over time; however, at 2 months of treatment 12% and 41% of patients still had viable TB bacteria present, as assessed by solid and liquid culture, respectively. What do these findings mean? The presence of viable TB bacteria in the sputum of pulmonary TB patients beyond 2 weeks of effective treatment suggests individuals may be infectious for longer than this interval. TB transmission requires the presence of viable mycobacteria in sputum and a mechanism for aerosol or droplet spread. Understanding how other factors, such as the presence of cough, change during treatment is also important for TB infection prevention and control. Tuberculosis (TB) is the leading cause of death from an infectious disease . Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) , the causative organism, is transmitted via respiratory droplet nuclei generated by individuals with pulmonary TB (PTB). Transmission is affected by environmental factors, characteristics of both the source case and exposed individual, and the nature of their contact. The greatest risk is from individuals with smear-positive PTB and high cough frequency [ 2 – 4 ]. Interruption of transmission requires identification and separation of infectious individuals until they are rendered non-infectious through treatment. Multiple countries’ national guidance documents recommend isolation of hospitalised individuals, with 2 weeks of effective treatment commonly cited as the time frame after which patients are considered non-infectious [ 5 – 9 ]. Implementing respiratory isolation has considerable resource implications, and is often unachievable in overstretched health systems in low- and middle-income countries, where the greatest burden of TB lies . The evidence base for the 2-week ‘rule’ has been repeatedly challenged by data demonstrating that most baseline sputum-culture-positive patients positive remain so for longer than 14 days . These individuals are potentially infectious, although diminished cough frequency may reduce transmission [ 4 , 11 ]. This systematic review was commissioned by the World Health Organization (WHO) Department of Global TB Programme Guideline Development Group (GDG) to synthesise evidence on the dynamics of potential infectiousness of individuals with PTB receiving effective therapy, informing the 2019 guideline update on TB infection prevention and control (IPC) . Potential infectiousness was defined here as detection of Mtb by sputum smear or culture, irrespective of cough dynamics or contact mixing patterns. Whilst smear microscopy may detect non-viable, and therefore non-infectious, bacilli, it is referenced as a measure of treatment response in published guidelines and in clinical practice. Molecular methods ( Mtb DNA detection, e.g., Xpert MTB/RIF [Cepheid]) also detect non-viable bacilli and are not routinely used in assessment of treatment response; such assessments were excluded from this analysis. Two types of evidence were considered: (1) data on time from treatment initiation to sputum smear and culture conversion and (2) data from measurements of infectiousness from PTB patients to experimental animals. Although cough is clearly important, review of cough dynamics during TB treatment did not form part of this study. Studies evaluating early bactericidal activity and human-to-human transmission were also considered outside the scope of this study. Methods This review is reported following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines . Our PRISMA checklist is located in S1 PRISMA Checklist . A prospectively registered review protocol is available in PROSPERO (  , study ID 85226 [background question 3]). Search strategy A professional librarian developed and executed the literature search, in consultation with the WHO GDG. The population of interest was patients receiving an effective treatment regimen for drug-susceptible PTB (DS-TB); the outcome of interest was bacteriological conversion of sputum. Effective treatment required at least rifampicin (R) and isoniazid (H) throughout, pyrazinamide (Z) for the 2-month intensive phase, and administration at least 5 days per week. Inclusion of ethambutol (E) and streptomycin (S) was permitted but not essential. Regimens including drugs not conventionally regarded as first-line, such as quinolones, were excluded . The outcome was defined as either the proportion of participants achieving bacteriological (smear or culture) conversion from positive to negative by fixed time points during treatment (proportion converted [PC]) or time to conversion (TTC) for the study population. As a descriptive analysis, no intervention or comparator group was defined. Full search parameters are detailed in S1 Table and S2 Table . The search was constructed in OvidSP MEDLINE, adapted and run in OvidSP Embase; OvidSP Global Health; and EBSCO CINAHL Plus. Searches used subject headings where available, and search terms in the title and abstract. Combinations of terms were used to capture the concepts of infectiousness and TB. Language was limited to English, Japanese, Chinese, Russian, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. On initial screening of search results, the authors noted the absence of several randomised controlled trials (RCTs) known to include culture conversion data in standard treatment arms. An additional search was therefore constructed identifying all RCTs of DS-TB treatment in humans. The first search was conducted on 1 December 2017 without date restrictions; the second (RCT search) was conducted on 20 February 2018, with date limited to 1990 onwards, to identify RCTs incorporating standard daily rifampicin-based regimens. To mitigate the risk of overlooking important data reported since our search censor date, during manuscript review we conducted a further literature search of OvidSP MEDLINE and Embase on 22 November 2020. We used the original search terms ( S1 Table and S2 Table ) combined with terms identified as being common either as keywords or in the titles/abstracts of studies already included in the review. Full details, including additional search terms, are provided in S1 Appendix . Study selection and data extraction Two-stage sifting by 2 independent reviewers was employed, applying predetermined eligibility criteria at title and abstract review and, where necessary, full-text screening. 