Background Given the increasing burden of chronic conditions, multimorbidity is now a priority for healthcare and public health systems worldwide. Appropriate methodological approaches for assessing the phenomenon have not yet been established, resulting in inconsistent and incomplete descriptions. We aimed to estimate and characterize the burden of multimorbidity in the adult population in France in terms of number and type of conditions, type of underlying mechanisms, and analysis of the joint effects for identifying combinations with the most deleterious interaction effects on health status. Methods and findings We used a multistep approach to analyze cross-sectional and longitudinal data from 2 large nationwide representative surveys: 2010/2014 waves of the Health, Health Care, and Insurance Survey  identify the relevant conditions for inclusion in the multimorbidity analysis; . This categorization was practically implemented in a standardized way, through the following steps: The age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio  to supermultiplicative . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. Interaction continuum and 5 categories of interaction on additive and multiplicative scales considered in this study. RoOR, ratio of odds ratios; RERI, relative excess risk due to interaction.  Joint effects and interactions of associated conditions on functioning  between the 48 selected chronic conditions by visualizing 3 main aggregates of associations that are consistent across time frames:  and analyzed as a 3-category variable. A light blue box indicates an OR ≤2. A star sign . Dyads with multiplicative or supermultiplicative interactions included obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, migraine accompanying other conditions, inflammatory arthritis and several forms of osteoarthritis, cardiac rhythm disorders, and stroke; dyads with additive interactions included cardiometabolic conditions, musculoskeletal conditions, and injury sequelae with other conditions. Depression and anxiety had a subadditive interaction: When associated with another condition, they had an additive interaction. The patterns of effects were similar across time frames, although the interactions shifted to the additive side for the lifetime frame compared to 1-year time frame  and perceived health (bad or very bad SRH, lower left panel below the diagonal) in ESPS (Panel A) and HSM surveys (Panel B). Interactions are evaluated by the RERI (see S8 Table for values) and represented using a color scale from green (low values: subadditive or additive) to red (high values: multiplicative or supermultiplicative). Only dyads with a frequency of ≥0.25% in at least 1 survey sample are considered. BMI, body mass index; ESPS, Enquête Santé et Protection Sociale; GALI: Global Activity Limitation Indicator; HSM, Enquête Handicap–Santé Ménages; RERI, relative excess risk due to interaction; SRH: Self-Reported Health indicator.  Discussion The use of a comprehensive and multistep analytical approach to analyze 2 large representative general population samples with cross-sectional and longitudinal data on numerous chronic conditions and a broad range of health indicators allowed us to estimate and characterize the burden of multimorbidity in France. This study also makes novel contributions to 3 crucial aspects of multimorbidity assessments and measurements: (1) proposing a comprehensive method for estimating and characterizing the burden based on the health impacts; (2) determining the underlying mechanisms to explain the observed associations; and (3) identifying multimorbid combinations with a high impact and the most deleterious interaction effects on health. Burden of multimorbidity in France Our study is the first to characterize the burden of multimorbidity in France. Estimates of the prevalence of specific conditions included in this study are similar to those previously reported in this country , while estimates of the prevalence of multimorbidity and specific multimorbid combinations as well as the observed higher prevalence among women are in line with other studies conducted in Europe [ 5 , 8 ] and worldwide . Our study strongly confirms that multimorbidity is not just a problem of old age [ 30 – 33 ]: In middle age (35 to 54 years), it affects 1 in 6 men and 1 in 4 women. This study also found marked socioeconomic gradients, with participants, especially women, with lower education and socioeconomic status exhibiting higher multimorbidity rates earlier in the life, as already observed [ 5 , 34 ]. Estimating and characterizing the burden of multimorbidity This study showed that a large number of chronic conditions (almost 50) significantly and independently impact mortality, activity limitations, or perceived heath in adults. With the exception of the Global Burden of Diseases (GBD) program, which included over 200 noncommunicable diseases in its 2017 updated version , most public health agencies worldwide monitor much fewer chronic conditions. For example, the US Centers for Disease Control monitors 10 conditions in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System , while Public Health England generates prevalence estimates for 12 health problems according to “health profiles,” to which modeled estimates of 7 conditions are added . Until a consensus is reached about which chronic conditions and combinations of conditions should be monitored regionally or internationally, this study pleads for the assessment of a large but also reasoned list of conditions that independently impact mortality, disability, or perceived health. This requirement for an independent impact on health enables us to move beyond the debate about which type of condition (risk factors, symptoms, syndromes, diseases) should be considered in the multimorbidity assessment : Any chronic or recurrent condition found in the current nosology (as reflected in the International Classification of Diseases, which includes diseases and sometimes syndromes and symptoms) with an independent impact on health should be considered as long as its frequency in the community justifies its monitoring. The magnitude of the impact may be considered among the prioritization criteria in order to limit the list. Multimorbid potential of conditions and meanings of the combinations This study confirmed that several conditions have a high “multimorbid potential,” i.e., a high possibility of being associated with other conditions, which is notably the case with vasculometabolic and musculoskeletal conditions, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and especially mental disorders. These conditions were found in many dyads and triads in line with those retrieved by Prados-Torres and colleagues  and Violan and colleagues . This suggests that interventions aimed at reducing the incidence of conditions with a high multimorbid potential could be an effective way to alleviate the burden of multimorbidity, which should thus be prioritized. On the contrary, as already reported , most cancers, multiple sclerosis, and dementia occur in a more isolated manner, although the underdiagnosis or underreporting of comorbid conditions cannot be excluded, in particular for dementia. One of the original aspects of this study, however, was the analysis of more than 200 dyads in terms of plausible etiological pathways. Using the typology of Valderas and colleagues , this analysis gave meaning to the combinations of conditions and provides clues for their clinical management beyond the simple mechanism of complication, which only drives a part of them. In particular, associations probably driven by bidirectional causality are especially important in the clinical setting if one condition is more treatable than another as in the case of depression and low back pain. Associations that share the same risk factors also require attention, as these factors may be more easily detected and tackled in multimorbid participants. In this regard, the major (and often causal) role played by obesity, depression, and anxiety in many associations, either as a component or as a shared risk factor of the components, should be stressed, especially as these conditions are not considered or are even excluded in several multimorbidity studies [ 39 , 40 ]. Impact and joint effects of multimorbid associations This study is one of the first to analytically address the impact and joint effects of a large number of multimorbid associations on activity limitations and perceived heath. These different but related aspects largely determine the potential severity of the multimorbid associations. As they directly reflect the burden experienced by the participants, the impact of multimorbid associations on health indicators is best investigated and reported in terms of absolute risks. Diseases with complications have the greatest impact on health, but associations of conditions that affect different systems also appear to have large impacts. Associations concerning systems involved in locomotion (cardiovascular, respiratory, osteoarticular), and to a lesser extent, those affecting sensorial functions strongly impact both activity limitations and perceived health, whereas associations with mental disorders mostly impact perceived health. The highly different impacts resulting from the association of 2, 3, or even 4 conditions, which form the bulk of the multimorbidity burden, make the simple counting of conditions inadequate in order to characterize the burden of multimorbidity. This inadequacy has recently been pointed out with regard to the impact on mortality [ 30 , 33 , 41 ]. The joint effects and especially the interactions of the components of associations, which are more closely related to biological mechanisms and synergy phenomena , probably deserve closer attention. In this study, interactions appeared to be extremely variable on a continuum from subadditive to supermultiplicative. The associations with multiplicative or supermultiplicative interactions, which included obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, migraine, and certain osteoarticular pathologies (inflammatory arthritis and osteoarthritis), were the most deleterious in terms of joint effects. By contrast, associations involving cardiometabolic conditions, low back pain, osteoporosis, injury sequelae, depression, and anxiety were less unfavorable for this effect. These results have important implications for multimorbidity measurements: The variable impacts and joint effects of associations would seem to preclude the exclusive use of a raw count of conditions to quantify multimorbidity. Strengths and limitations of the study The strengths of this study include the use of 2 large and nationally representative surveys, including both cross-sectional and longitudinal data on 60 chronic or recurrent conditions and 6 health status measures, and the use of a multistep, systematic, and analytical approach to estimate the impact and the joint effects of conditions on health and to assess the underlying mechanisms explaining multimorbid associations. Moreover, the convergence and consistency of results across surveys, health indicators, and time frames further supports the robustness of our results, which was of particular importance due the type I statistical error that inevitably plagues the study of numerous morbidities. This study also has some limitations. First, despite the relatively high levels of participation and follow-up rates achieved in the 2 nationwide surveys considered here, various marginal population groups (particularly severely ill participants) may have been underrepresented, thus limiting the external validity of the study. Second, self-reported information on chronic or recurrent conditions could be subject to an information bias due to social desirability (especially mental health conditions), age, and selective recall (symptom-based conditions are reported more frequently in surveys ). For many of the studied conditions, frequencies (1-year or lifetime frame) were similar to estimates from previous studies conducted in France except for obesity (when compared to studies where height and weight were measured ), and for conditions requiring institutionalization such as dementia or schizophrenia, which were less prevalent than expected. Underestimation of weight may represent a serious problem in terms of the control of confounding factors, since obesity is involved in many multimorbid associations. In other conditions, we presume that these biases mostly had a nondifferential effect on health indicators, possibly with the exception of the impact of disease severity on recall, as more severe conditions were more likely to be recalled and associated with poorer health status (severity was not directly assessed in this study, as in most others conducted to date on multimorbidity [ 21 , 45 ]). However, a lack of sensitivity in the reported information is preferable to a lack of specificity in terms of the nondifferential misclassification bias observed in association studies . Third, the implementation of the approach to investigating the etiological pathways underlying multimorbid associations, using the typology proposed by Valderas and colleagues , suffers from several limitations: The empirical analyses used to classify into “chance only” and “confounding” categories may have been vulnerable to incomplete data (unrecorded conditions), to the cross-sectional nature of part of them, and sometimes to the lack of power; and the literature searching reflects the current knowledge, limited as regards causal associations between many conditions. Formal mediation analyses would have been preferable but were far from being achievable in, and also beyond the scope of, this study. Fourth, this study refrained from using data reduction methods such as factor or cluster analyses to investigate disease clustering into “patterns.” The implementation of these methods raises various problems, many of which still need to be resolved . The consideration of disease combinations in dyads/triads/tetrads, as undertaken in this study, actually addressed patterns in three-quarters of multimorbid participants and also shed light on the process of morbidity aggregation (multimorbidity first involves two conditions, then three, then four, and so on). Fifth, unmeasured or incompletely controlled biological confounding cannot be excluded. Indeed, control for confounding is necessary when considering interactions . The implications of this unquantifiable confounding would be primarily an attenuation of the associations. Finally, despite the large sample size, the power was limited to detecting small effects associated with less frequent conditions or even moderate effects in longitudinal analyses. The study of mortality was clearly underpowered due to the low number of deaths observed in the ESPS survey. Policy and research implications The lack of methodological consensus or consistent approaches for studying multimorbidity has been a serious impediment for the development of appropriate control and prevention strategies. The proposed approach reported in this paper can guide future contributions with the aim to gain a better understanding and awareness of the different aspects of multimorbidity. Although undertaken in a single country (France), this study is replicable, as exemplified by the use of several survey datasets. It could therefore be readily implemented in many countries with existing systems for the surveillance of chronic diseases. Multimorbidity is definitely not only a problem of old age; identification and monitoring should be implemented as early as midlife, possibly earlier in disadvantaged groups. Multimorbidity assessments should rapidly move beyond the simple counting of chronic conditions of any kind by including dozens of chronic conditions that impact health and taking into account variable impacts and joint effects of component conditions (e.g., monitoring the most frequent and impacting dyads or triads). Approaches to reduce the incidence of these combinations and minimize their impact should also be a priority for improving the health of multimorbid participants and reducing their impact on healthcare resources. Further research is needed to evaluate the influence of the data collection method (self-reports, medical records, administrative data) and the comprehensiveness of data sources on medical conditions, which should definitely include obesity and mental disorders. Longitudinal studies of trajectories of multimorbid aggregations according to age, sex, and socioeconomic status and their impacts are also required, along with fundamental and clinical research on pathological interactions, notably between somatic and mental disorders. The clinical implications of the (statistical) concept of the interaction continuum from subadditive to supermultiplicative should be scrutinized. Without much delay, however, multimorbid combinations with large health impacts and most deleterious interactions should be appropriately monitored and managed within the healthcare system. Supporting information S1 STROBE Checklist. Checklist for Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE).  (DOCX) S1 Table. Description of the studied samples (ESPS and HSM surveys).  (DOCX) S2 Table. Associations of conditions with activity limitations, perceived health, or mortality in the ESPS and HSM surveys.  (DOCX) S3 Table. Impact of studied chronic conditions on activity limitations and perceived health in the ESPS and HSM surveys.  (DOCX) S4 Table. Risk of multimorbidity, defined as having at least 2 of the 48 selected conditions, associated with age, sex, and socioeconomic status indicators (education level, occupation, and household income) as estimated in multiple logistic regression models.  (DOCX) S5 Table. Number of selected conditions and prevalence of multimorbidity according to age and sex.  (DOCX) S6 Table. Risk of multimorbidity (vs monomorbidity) and number of conditions associated with each of the 48 chronic conditions retained.  (DOCX) S7 Table. Weighted frequency of dyads of conditions, strength of associations, and plausible etiological pathways explaining the associations.  (DOCX) S8 Table. Weighted frequency of triads and tetrads of conditions.  (DOCX) S9 Table. Impact of associated conditions (dyads) on activity limitations and perceived health in the ESPS and HSM surveys.  (DOCX) S10 Table. Impact of associated conditions (triads and tetrads) on activity limitations and perceived health in the ESPS and HSM surveys.  (DOCX) S11 Table. Joint effects of dyads of associated conditions on activity limitations (severely limited in GALI, limited in ≥3 ADLs or ≥2 IADLs, new limitation) and perceived health (bad or very bad SRH, new health deterioration) in the ESPS and HSM surveys when the conditions were retained in the final models presented in Table 1 .  (DOCX) S12 Table. Joint effects of two-by-two associated conditions within triads on activity limitations and perceived health in the ESPS and HSM surveys when the conditions were retained in the final models presented in Table 1 .  (DOCX) Acknowledgments Disclaimer The present paper represents the opinions of the authors and does not necessarily reflect the position of their employers. 