Background Test-trace-isolate programs are an essential part of coronavirus disease 2019 . Though there will be uninfected individuals both in quarantine and in the community, these do not play a role in our calculations and are ignored. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 1. Conceptual representation of the model algorithm , where infections in generation t . We define the relative transmissibility of individuals in these compartments by γ D and γ Q such that:  to reduce onward transmission from those who may be infected.  Translating observed metrics to model inputs Health departments collect data on their test-trace-isolate programs, but these observed metrics need to be translated into model inputs. To estimate isolation completeness . However, the effect of improvements in one dimension are not independent of performance in the other dimensions, and as such, the aspect where improvements will yield the greatest dividends, the “next best move,” depends on the current status of the program. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. Improvements to case isolation and contact quarantine : Impact of case isolation timing . Whether you have highly effective contact tracing  or less effective contact tracing , little will be gained by improving the speed of case isolation, and the greatest reductions in transmission will be achieved by improving the proportion of infections detected and isolated . Increasing the proportion of infections detected and isolated, regardless of other metrics, is critical because it is these detected cases that “seed” all other test-trace-isolate activities. If an infection is not detected, it cannot be isolated, and their contacts cannot be traced and quarantined. Reducing the time to case isolation  may be nearly as effective as improving case isolation completeness in certain contexts, in particular, if contact tracing is less effective and isolation completeness is reasonably high , hence the program must rely predominantly on reductions in transmission from isolated cases themselves. The benefits of increasing the speed and completeness of contact tracing and quarantine are greatest in the context of already highly effective testing and isolation . In such situations, increasing quarantine completeness yields the largest reductions in transmission , particularly when the speed of contact quarantine is less than 8 days from case symptom onset. Improvements in the speed of contact quarantine  are most effective during the 4- to 8-day window after case symptom onset for similar reasons; this period corresponds to the greatest expected infectiousness of infected contacts. The impact of improvements in the speed or completeness of contact tracing is less if testing and isolation fail to reach a high percentage of infections . As noted above, this is because without adequate detected cases to seed contact tracing activities, the ability of tracing and quarantine to have an impact is substantially reduced. The completeness and timing of test-trace-isolate activities determine whether we can achieve goals in disease control using these approaches. A common goal is to bring R below one so that the epidemic will start to recede in the population. We explored the range of program characteristics that could achieve this goal, under the assumption that contacts were quarantined on the same day as case isolation, and quarantine completeness ranged from 50% to 100% . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Isolation strategies . It is not possible to achieve R <1 if case isolation occurs more than 6.4 days after symptom onset, on average, and this threshold increases to 7, 9, and 10 days for R starting at 2, 1.5, and 1.25. Quarantine need not be perfect to achieve R <1 , but the tolerance for imperfect quarantine changes with isolation speed. For example, case isolation completeness needs to increase from 60% to 75% to offset a decrease in contact quarantine completeness from 100% to 50% when cases are isolated on the same day as symptom onset. However, this tolerance for incomplete quarantine rapidly degrades as the time to isolation increases, and, in the absence of other interventions . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. Relationship between R and the proportion of detected infections among traced contacts. Each position along a line shows a single test-trace-isolate strategy, with a fixed delay from case symptom onset to isolation . Similarly, previous scenarios assume that all contacts are equally at risk of being infected, but contact tracing studies suggest that the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection for household contacts could be 6 . There is growing evidence that the distribution of onward transmission for SARS-CoV-2 is overdispersed, meaning that most individuals contribute little to onward transmission, while superspreading events result in the bulk of secondary infections [ 19 , 20 ]. Overdispersion has little effect on the mean estimates of the reproductive number . However, when there are few total infections in a community, the random occurrence or detection of any one superspreading event can drastically alter program impact, including ending an outbreak altogether, thereby increasing uncertainty in R . Recent policy recommendations have suggested that 10-day quarantines rather than the previously recommended 14-day quarantines may be acceptable under certain circumstances . When we modify our assumption of perfectly effective quarantine, we find that 10-day quarantines are somewhat less effective and that this effect is more pronounced in scenarios with rapid quarantine and widespread and rapid isolation . Sensitivity analyses The above results are sensitive to assumptions about the infectious period and generation time of SARS-CoV-2. While the qualitative trends and relationships hold regardless, assumptions of a shorter generation time substantially increase the necessary speed at which activities must occur to have a meaningful impact . Discussion Test-trace-isolate programs have the potential to play an important role in COVID-19 control, but the extent of that role depends on each program’s ability to limit transmission of the virus. Here, we have presented a modeling framework with which to evaluate the performance of the often independent test-and-isolate and contact tracing components of test-trace-isolate programs and shown how 4 key metrics of performance interact. The results show that a program’s ability to detect cases through community testing is one of the greatest drivers of program effectiveness, as it is these cases that seed all other activities. Rapid case isolation, complete contact tracing, and timely quarantine will compound the impact that identifying a new seed will have on the trajectory of the epidemic. Nevertheless, exceptional performance may be needed across all of these dimensions if transmission is to be controlled by test-trace-isolate alone, raising the importance of complementary control activities . Previous work has emphasized the importance of decreasing delays to case isolation and contact quarantine to reduce disease transmission [ 23 , 24 ]. However, these models assumed high testing and isolation coverage , and further exploration is possible. We assumed that the incubation period, generation time, and test-trace-isolate time delays were fixed at mean values, although previous work has shown that variability in these time delay distributions may affect the impact of disease control . In addition, the model relies on a simplified version of transmission that does not account for many risk factors for SARS-CoV-2 infection or the contact structure in the population [ 38 , 41 ], which could lead to persistent transmission even when the population reproductive number is low (e.g., if there are clusters of connected cases that are not detected or cannot isolate completely). This may be particularly true if heterogeneities in transmission are associated with our ability to identify individuals through testing or contact tracing. Though nonadherence can be crudely considered by modifying the proportion isolated and proportion quarantined, our model framework does not capture the real-world imperfections where cases and contacts are unable to completely avoid contact with all other individuals. While the reproductive number is a useful representation of transmission control at the population level, it does not capture differential health burden of infections, and a program could have a higher R but better limit mortality if it effectively protects at-risk populations. Test-trace-isolate programs should not alone be used to control COVID-19. It is exceedingly difficult to achieve a reproductive number less than one without additional reductions in transmission from other interventions, which may include masking or broadscale social distancing. Likewise, our model is based on proportions, but resource needs are determined by the absolute number of identified cases and traced contacts. When incidence is high, resources needed to test and trace the desired proportion of infections may be excessive, but if incidence is brought down through other control measures, the same targets may be logistically feasible. Still, test-trace-isolate programs need not themselves bring R below one to be valuable, and incremental reductions in transmission can alleviate the need for the most severe social distancing measures. Hence, test-trace-isolate isolate programs have a valuable role to play in the COVID-19 response, even if such programs themselves are not the whole solution. Understanding the impact that a program is having, or that would result from investing in better program performance, is critical to the effective use of these programs within a broader control strategy. We hope that the model presented here, which is implemented in publicly available tools, will help facilitate the effective use of these programs in the COVID-19 response. Supporting information Supporting information. Skip to fig share navigation Share Download fig share S1 Text. Supporting information. Model details, input parameters, and sensitivity analyses.  (PDF) Acknowledgments We would like to thank the numerous public health workers and agencies that gave comments and guidance on the development of our model and the ConTESSA app, including Josh Sharfstein and Melissa Marx. We would also like to thank Isabel Rodríguez-Barraquer for her valuable comments on this manuscript. Finally, we recognize the valuable support from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Center for Teaching and Learning. 