Background Managing noncommunicable diseases through primary healthcare has been identified as the key strategy to achieve universal health coverage but is challenging in most low- and middle-income countries. Stroke is the leading cause of death and disability in rural China. This study aims to determine whether a primary care-based integrated mobile health intervention . The SINEMA App has been designed for multiple end-users including village doctors and township and county physicians and included multiple modules including patients’ profiles, follow-up visits, training, performance indicators, and follow-up visits reminders . Aided by the SINEMA App , village doctors could collect, record, and retrieve patients’ information and follow-up history, and physicians from upper-tier hospitals could review the records and monitoring village doctors’ performance. The digital health system was linked with a third-party dispatching platform and a message bank containing more than 180 messages that we codesigned with clinical experts and local healthcare providers. These messages followed the same structure, was recorded in the local dialect, and were dispatched daily with different contents to participants. More detailed description on the development of the intervention package and digital health system could be found in previous publications [ 15 , 18 , 19 ]. After allocation of randomization, village doctors in the intervention arm were invited to a 1-day training session delivered by county hospital physicians who were trained by neurologists from a tertiary hospital. The training session covered the evidence-based use of essential medicines, skills for promoting patients’ behavior changes, and the use of SINEMA App . Each village doctor was also provided with a written intervention manual and an Android smartphone with the SINEMA App installed to support intervention delivery. Android instead of iOS . After excluding 10 ineligible villages and people who did not meet the inclusion criteria from the remaining villages, we recruited 50 villages with a total of 1,299 patients in the trial between June 23 and July 21, 2017. These 50 villages were randomized into the intervention arm  who had low educational level . The additional analysis on BP control revealed that the intervention resulted in a 19% . The intervention arm also brought significantly fewer number of events in stroke recurrence  S1 Table. Baseline characteristics for the SINEMA trial at the cluster and provider level.  (DOCX) S2 Table. Baseline characteristics by status on loss to follow-up at the patient level.  (DOCX) S3 Table. Fidelity to the intervention protocol in the 25 intervention villages.  (DOCX) S4 Table. Program delivery costs over 12 months in US dollar.  (DOCX) S5 Table. Sensitivity analysis of systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure as hypertension control.  (DOCX) S6 Table. Sensitivity analysis results on primary, secondary and exploratory outcomes.  (DOCX) Acknowledgments We would like to thank the independent International Steering Committee Chair (Yangfeng Wu) and members (Eric Peterson and Craig Anderson) and Advisory group members (Alba Amaya-Burns, Allan Burns, Ninghua Wang, Xie Bin, Jesse Hao, Jixiang Ma, Jixin Sun, Jianxin Zhang, Jianmin Yao, Jinmei Liu, Qian Long, and Cheng Sun) who have provided great advice in designing and implementing the study. We would also like to acknowledge collaborators from China Mobile Research Institute (Na Wu, Zhuoran Zhang, Mengyao Chen, Bo Wang, and Nan Ding) and colleagues and students (Erdan Luo, Duan Zhao, Longkai Zang, Peng Bao, Julian Donovan, Heng Jiang, Ying Yang, and Anran Tan) who have contributed to the development of the SINEMA mHealth system and voice messages. We also thank Dejin Dong and his team (Xingtai City Center for Disease Prevention and Control), Zhenli Xu and his team (Nanhe County Center for Disease Prevention and Control), Congxuan Wu and his team (Ren County Center for Disease Prevention and Control), and all staff members from township healthcare centers and village clinics, and all patients who participated or supported the project. 