Background Gestational hypertensive and acute hypotensive disorders are associated with maternal morbidity and mortality worldwide. However, physiological blood pressure changes in pregnancy are insufficiently defined. We describe blood pressure changes across healthy pregnancies from the International Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century , the same cohort that contributed to the INTERGROWTH-21st Fetal Growth Standards . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 1. Flow diagram illustrating women enrolled in FGLS. FGLS, Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study.  Descriptive data The published sociodemographic characteristics  were similar across sites . Of the 9 comparisons of systolic blood pressure that were ≥0.5 SSD, the sites in India and the UK contributed 5 and 4, respectively, although the difference was <0.5 for both sites at 9 to 13 +6 weeks’ gestation . Of the 6 comparisons of diastolic blood pressure that were >0.5 SSD, sites in Italy and the UK contributed 5 and 1, respectively, although the difference was <0.5 at 9 to 13 +6 weeks’ gestation . We investigated the effect of removing these potential outlying sites from the dataset used to construct the centiles: The effect was minimal, so all were included . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. SSD for systolic blood pressure in the FGLS of the INTERGROWTH-21st Project. FGLS, Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SD, standard deviation; SSD, standardised site difference.  Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. SSD for diastolic blood pressure in the FGLS of the INTERGROWTH-21st Project. DBP, diastolic blood pressure; FGLS, Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study; SD, standard deviation; SSD, standardised site difference.  For all women, the median systolic blood pressure was lowest at 12 weeks’ gestation: 111.5  showed similar blood pressure patterns . Fig 5 shows the absolute change from baseline blood pressure for all women. Systolic blood pressure fell by >14 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure by >11 mmHg from baseline in fewer than 10% of women at any gestational age. Systolic blood pressure fell by >16 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure by >11 mmHg in only 3% of women at 40 weeks’ gestation. Under 10% of women increased their systolic blood pressure by >24 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure by >18 mmHg at any gestational age. Less than 3% of women increased their systolic blood pressure by >34 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure by >26 mmHg. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. Changes from baseline for both systolic and diastolic blood pressure from 16 weeks’ gestation for third, 10th, 50th, 90th, and 97th centiles.  Smoothed centiles for blood pressure by gestational age, and change from baseline blood pressure, depending on quartile of baseline blood pressure at study enrolment are presented . The figures demonstrate a strong regression to the mean effect. Discussion Our population-based study includes over 4,000 healthy women from 8 diverse countries, which allowed construction of international, evidence-based, gestational age-specific centiles for blood pressure throughout pregnancy. Systolic blood pressure rose through pregnancy, with no mid-second trimester drop. The diastolic blood pressure nadir at 19 +5 weeks’ gestation was only 0.6 mmHg lower than measures taken at study entry <14 weeks’ gestation. A decrease of >14 mmHg from the baseline systolic or diastolic blood pressure was unusual . The large size of the study made it impractical to define the time of day at which blood pressure was measured to allow exploration of circadian effects. In our study, blood pressure was not measured in duplicate; however, this mirrors clinical practice. The INTERGROWTH-21st Project recruited women with a BMI <30 kg/m 2 ; therefore, the applicability of the findings to women with a BMI 3 30 kg/m 2 is uncertain. Further work is needed to determine how knowledge of these centiles affects the detection of deteriorating health in pregnant women. Policy implications There is an indisputable need for pregnancy-specific early warning scores that incorporate blood pressure changes . Current national definitions of severe maternal sepsis either do not include hypotension as a contributory factor . Fig B in S3 Text: Smoothed centiles for SBP and DBP in mmHg; third, 10th, 50th, 90th, and 97th centiles with corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Fig C in S3 Text: Smoothed centiles for SBP and DBP in mmHg excluding women . First quartile 76–105/40–64 mmHg; second quartile 106–111/65–70 mmHg; third quartile 112–119/71–75 mmHg; fourth quartile ≥120/76 mmHg). Fig E in S3 Text: Change in systolic and DBP during pregnancy by quartiles of baseline blood pressure at study entry at 9–13 +6 weeks’ gestation. DBP, diastolic blood pressure; FGLS, Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SD, standard deviation; SSD, standardised site difference.  (DOCX) S4 Text. Contributions to membership of the INTERGROWTH-21st and its Committees. INTERGROWTH-21st, International Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century.  (DOCX) Acknowledgments We would like to thank the health authorities in Pelotas, Brazil; Beijing, China; Nagpur, India; Turin, Italy; Nairobi, Kenya; Muscat, Oman; Oxford, United Kingdom; and Seattle, United States of America who facilitated the project by allowing participation of these study sites as collaborating centres. We are extremely grateful to Philips Medical Systems who provided the ultrasound equipment and technical assistance throughout the project. We also thank MedSciNet U.K. for setting up the INTERGROWTH-21st website and for the development, maintenance, and support of the online data management system. We thank the parents and infants who participated in the studies and the more than 200 members of the research teams who made the implementation of this project possible. The participating hospitals included Brazil, Pelotas (Hospital Miguel Piltcher, Hospital São Francisco de Paula, Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Pelotas, and Hospital Escola da Universidade Federal de Pelotas); China, Beijing (Beijing Obstetrics & Gynecology Hospital, Shunyi Maternal & Child Health Centre, and Shunyi General Hospital); India, Nagpur (Ketkar Hospital, Avanti Institute of Cardiology Private Limited, Avantika Hospital, Gurukrupa Maternity Hospital, Mulik Hospital & Research Centre, Nandlok Hospital, Om Women’s Hospital, Renuka Hospital & Maternity Home, Saboo Hospital, Brajmonhan Taori Memorial Hospital, and Somani Nursing Home); Kenya, Nairobi (Aga Khan University Hospital, MP Shah Hospital and Avenue Hospital); Italy, Turin (Ospedale Infantile Regina Margherita Sant’ Anna and Azienda Ospedaliera Ordine Mauriziano); Oman, Muscat (Khoula Hospital, Royal Hospital, Wattayah Obstetrics & Gynaecology Poly Clinic, Wattayah Health Centre, Ruwi Health Centre, Al-Ghoubra Health Centre and Al-Khuwair Health Centre); UK, Oxford (John Radcliffe Hospital); and USA, Seattle (University of Washington Hospital, Swedish Hospital, and Providence Everett Hospital). Author contributions to Membership of International Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century (INTERGROWTH-21st) and its committees are available in S4 Text . Full acknowledgement of all those who contributed to the development of the INTERGROWTH-21st Project protocol appears at www.intergrowth21.org.uk . 