Background Influenza is a cause of febrile acute respiratory infection . Observation period for each child began 14 days postreceipt of final vaccine dose each year. Children with at least 4 weeks of follow-up during the observation period for a given study year were included in the analysis until the earliest of the following censoring events: influenza virus infection . During Year 1, 42 children emigrated and 3 died. For Year 2, of 2,996 . Baseline characteristics including age, nutritional status, and household characteristics were similar between the 4 groups . During Year 2, total influenza virus circulation was higher than in Year 1, with longer peak periods, from June 2016 through September 2016 ; Round 2: July 14 to August 7 . Sequencing of the haemagglutinin , we observed that in the first 6 months postvaccination in both years, relative efficacy of LAIV compared with IIV was not significantly different . Local adverse events were more common in the injection group/s as compared with the nasally administered groups. Recurrent wheezing was reported by approximately 1% of children over the 2-year period and not significantly different between groups. SAEs were rare, and none were attributed to be causally related to vaccination. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Table 4. Adverse events associated with live attenuated and inactivated influenza vaccines within 42 days post-administration, aggregated across study years.  Discussion This 2-year, triple-blind, large community-based trial demonstrated that both indigenously produced Russian-backbone LAIV and commercially available IIV were safe and moderately efficacious against laboratory-confirmed influenza-associated FARI among children aged 2 to 10 years in rural India. In Year 1, single-dose LAIV provided some protection to a vaccine-naïve population but significantly less than IIV, whereas in Year 2, LAIV and IIV efficacies were similar. Importantly, during both years, both vaccines were protective against influenza A S2 Fig. Analysis flowchart: description of data flow for mITT analysis of LAIV trial. LAIV, live attenuated influenza vaccine; mITT, modified intention-to-treat.   