Background In patients with resectable colorectal liver metastases  and adjuvant  and Cohort 2 , insufficient tumor tissue for mutation testing . The primary tumor had been resected prior to liver resection in all but one patient. Twenty-three patients received upfront chemotherapy. An R0 liver resection was achieved in 30 of the 31 . On average, there was a 40.93-fold . The ctDNA dynamics during neoadjuvant chemotherapy for the individual patients are shown in Fig 3B . Of the 21 patients with positive ctDNA at baseline, 13 had undetectable ctDNA at T C2 , T C3 , or T C4 , and 5 had persistently positive ctDNA at T C4 . Three cases did not have T C4 samples collected and could not be assessed for ctDNA clearance. ctDNA remained undetectable at T C4 in the 2 patients with negative ctDNA at baseline and neither had recurred at last follow-up , but the study is underpowered to detect a difference due to the small sample size. Comparing baseline and post cycle 4 restaging CT scans, RECIST-defined objective response was observed in 7 of 13  ctDNA positive rate at baseline  was observed in 3 patients, 2 of whom remained recurrence-free at last follow-up, 60 and 82 months after surgery. All 8 patients who had detectable ctDNA at completion of adjuvant chemotherapy . Two patients with an initial negative ctDNA postoperatively developed a positive test at completion of adjuvant chemotherapy  Sankey plot of ctDNA dynamics with adjuvant chemotherapy treatment and recurrence outcome for the 36 patients who had both postoperative , but no difference was seen for OS . Patients with a positive ctDNA status after surgery or at the end of all treatment had a significantly lower RFS and OS compared to those with negative ctDNA at these time points . The Kaplan–Meier estimates of RFS at 5 years were 16.7% and 69.3% for the postoperative ctDNA-positive and ctDNA-negative groups  RFS for baseline ctDNA . A swimmer plot of serial ctDNA detectability and clinical outcomes for cohort 1 and 2 patients is shown in Fig 6B . Of the 49 patients with both baseline . Sixteen of the 23 patients with recurrence had blood samples collected prior to or at the time of recurrence, with ctDNA being detected in 14 of 16  RFS stratified by baseline ctDNA MAF quartiles; MAF cut-offs: Q1 ≤ 0.15, Q2 > 0.15 and ≤ 1.04, Q3 > 1.04 and ≤ 7.2, Q4 > 7.2. . How to increase assay sensitivity is an important question to address in future studies. One potential strategy would be to increase the volume of plasma, another way would be to assess more mutations, as does the Signatera assay which involves whole exome sequencing of the tumor tissue and then interrogates up to 16 variants in the plasma. However, to identify more mutations requires >100 times more sequencing of the primary tumor DNA, ordering personalized primer pairs for every patient, and more sequencing of plasma DNA, which substantially increases cost. Moreover, the more mutations analyzed, the more artefactual mutations are detected, compromising assay specificity. A more focussed panel such as our 15-gene panel has several advantages over genome-wide or exome-wide screening for ctDNA detection, including lower cost (approximately $1 per patient for a panel of primers) and increased specificity. Even with advances in ctDNA assay, false negative results can still occur due to biological factors such as low DNA shedding tumours, mucinous histology, and anatomical location of the occult micrometastatic disease. Ultimately, the optimal approach will have to balance cost, throughput, and specificity, and different approaches may be most suitable for patients depending on the type of cancer, disease stage, and the clinical application. Most importantly, prospective studies where the ctDNA results are used to inform patient management are required to define the value of a ctDNA-guided approach to patient management. In summary, we have confirmed the prognostic significance of detecting ctDNA at defined time points in patients undergoing resection for CRLM and, for the first time, demonstrated the potential value of serial analysis during adjuvant therapy and during surveillance in such patients. Further studies of ctDNA in this population are required to demonstrate the clinical utility of a ctDNA-informed approach to treatment and surveillance strategies, including the ultimate impact on recurrence-free and overall survival. Supporting information S1 REMARK Checklist. REporting recommendations for tumour MARKer prognostic studies (REMARK).  (DOCX) 