Background Oral bleeding after dental extraction in patients on non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants  years in the TXA group and 72.7 . No patient had 4 or more oral bleeds in the TXA group, whereas 10 patients in the placebo group had. Fig 3 shows the number of oral bleeds per day after dental extraction. TXA had no influence on early post-extraction oral bleeding  had an unplanned medical contact after dental extraction compared to patients using placebo  patients assigned to TXA and 77 bleeds in 24/57 , predominantly related to bleeding. Our results confirm the high event rate of oral bleeds in patients treated with NOACs undergoing tooth extraction, with more than 1 out of 4 patients reporting any bleeding. Moreover, half of the patients with a bleeding reported multiple oral bleeding events. In the TXA group, no patients had 4 or more bleedings, compared to 10 patients in the placebo group. Fewer patients in the TXA group thus suffered recurrent bleeding. Two patients in each group experienced allergic reactions after the use of the assigned mouthwash, and no patients had thrombotic complications after the use of TXA, highlighting that TXA is well tolerated and safe to use. The intervention with TXA mouthwash is also affordable, readily available on the market, and therefore easy to implement in clinical practice. In our study, 6 patients in the TXA group and 9 patients in the placebo group interrupted their NOAC (without it being planned in preparation for surgery). Unplanned interruption of anticoagulants is a concern in clinical practice, since it is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular events . Patient adherence and compliance with the doctor’s advice remain important. An exploratory subgroup analysis showed that patients who underwent extraction of 2 or more teeth and elderly patients and patients who restarted their NOAC within 24 hours after the dental extraction might benefit more from treatment with TXA. However, the latter finding was not statistically significant. These findings support the hypothesis that the potential benefit of a hemostatic agent is likely to be the largest in patients with friable mucosa and more extensive tissue damage. An immature coagulum combined with reinitiation of the anticoagulant may then result in bleeding. Future studies may focus on this high-risk population. After enrolling 222 out of 236 planned patients, the trial was prematurely stopped during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic after a futility analysis by the Data Safety Monitoring Board based on the number of patients with oral bleeding. This was the main limitation of the study. Another limitation was that we relied on self-reported information gathered during a follow-up by phone to assess the patients’ compliance with the study protocol. However, the studied intervention was a simple intervention, and patients got both oral and written instructions on a schematic leaflet about the protocol. A last limitation was that there was no fixed time point on restarting the NOAC after dental extraction. Patients were instructed on when to restart their NOAC, but the exact timing of the NOAC re-intake was left at the patient’s decision. As a result, there was a spread in the timing of the NOAC restart among the studied patients, and the possible effect hereof on bleeding after dental extraction is unclear. The question on timing of NOAC restart needs further study. In conclusion, a 10% TXA mouthwash did not reduce the number of patients with any oral bleeding after dental extraction, nor the periprocedural bleeding or early bleeding after extraction. TXA appears to reduce delayed bleeding and bleeding after multiple dental extractions. Follow-up studies may explore potential benefit in high-risk patient populations. Supporting information The current manuscript follows the CONSORT reporting guidelines. Showing 1/5: pmed.1003601.s001.pdf Skip to fig share navigation 1 / 5 Share Download fig share S1 CONSORT Checklist. The current manuscript follows the CONSORT reporting guidelines. CONSORT, Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials.  (PDF) S1 SAP Interim. The interim statistical analysis plan of the EXTRACT-NOAC study. NOAC, non-vitamin K oral anticoagulant.  (PDF) S2 SAP Final. The final statistical analysis plan of the EXTRACT-NOAC study. NOAC, non-vitamin K oral anticoagulant.  (PDF) S1 Table. Details of the dental extraction are given according to the treatment groups.  (PDF) S2 Table. Details of the unplanned medical contacts and unplanned NOAC interruptions are given according to the treatment groups. NOAC, non-vitamin K oral anticoagulant.  (PDF) Acknowledgments We thank study coordinator Barbara Debaveye, University Hospitals of Leuven; study recruiters Laura-Lien Poortmans and Jeroen Martens, both of the University of Leuven; and bioinformaticians Michiel Van der Haegen and Ipek Guler Caamano Fajardo, University of Leuven. We also thank Peter Van Rompaey, University of Leuven, for managing any queries in the database. They did not receive compensation for their support of this study. 