The recently reported “UK variant” , and conducted microscopy studies on the ACE2–spike complexes. A cryo-EM structure of the spike protein ectodomain with the N501Y mutation was obtained at an average resolution of approximately 2.8 Å . The structure shows no significant global changes in secondary or quaternary structure as a result of the mutation when compared to the previously published structure of the spike protein ectodomain with an Asn residue at position 501  . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Table 1. Data collection and processing parameters, refinement and validation statistics.  Cryo-EM structural analysis of the complex formed between the N501Y spike protein ectodomain and the ACE2 receptor ectodomain provides a detailed glimpse of both the overall structure of the receptor and the binding interface between the RBD and ACE2 . The ACE2 receptor is bound to the “up” position of the RBD . The overall structure of the complex was determined at a global resolution of 2.9 Å. Local refinement of the RBD–ACE2 interface improves the local resolution at the binding interface to approximately 3.3 Å , resulting in unambiguous delineation of the Y501 side chain and other residues in the vicinity . The overall structure at the binding site is almost identical to that of the unmutated version  , with the exception of local rearrangements that result in the aromatic ring of Y501 being accommodated in a cavity that is sandwiched between Y41 and K353 of the ACE2 receptor . Y501 in the spike protein and Y41 in the ACE2 receptor form a perpendicular y-shaped π–π stacking interaction . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 1. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 N501Y mutant spike protein ectodomain bound to the ACE2 ectodomain. . The higher relative luminescence unit . Notably, several studies have demonstrated that the N501Y mutation confers much larger increases . The comparison of neutralization profiles shows that the IC 50 for neutralization of the N501Y mutant is lower, suggesting that full-length spikes bearing the N501Y mutation bind ACE2-mFc to a higher extent. Taken together with recent reports [ 22 – 28 ], these 3 results are consistent with the hypothesis that the greater infectivity of the N501Y mutant stems from improved binding to ACE2. N501Y has minimal effects on the binding and potency of 2 neutralizing antibodies with RBD epitopes Next, we tested the effect of the N501Y mutation on the relative strengths of binding and neutralization potency of V H Fc ab8 and IgG ab1 . ELISA analysis of IgG ab1 and V H Fc ab8 interactions with unmutated or N501Y spike ectodomains demonstrates that the N501Y mutation has no significant effect on V H Fc ab8 binding but results in a slightly higher EC 50 for IgG ab1 . Second, competition experiments establish that IgG ab1 more efficiently prevents ACE2 binding of the unmutated ectodomain compared to the N501Y mutant , while V H Fc ab8 prevents ACE2 binding of unmutated and N501Y mutant spike proteins to similar extents . This is further confirmed by negative stain experiments, where V H ab8 interferes with ACE2 binding in both the unmutated and N501Y spikes . Consistent with these measurements, neutralization experiments carried out with V H Fc ab8 show that it can neutralize the N501Y mutant with a potency similar to that of the unmutated form, while IgG ab1 exhibits a slightly diminished neutralization potency for the N501Y mutant relative to pseudoviruses expressing the unmutated form . Overall, binding and neutralization analyses show that the N501Y mutation results in enhanced ACE2 binding, minimal effects on the binding and potency of V H Fc ab8, and a small reduction in the binding and potency of IgG ab1. To understand the effects of these antibodies at a structural level, we next determined cryo-EM structures of the complexes formed by V H ab8  ELISA analysis of antibody interactions with either N501Y or unmutated spike ectodomain. . The global average resolution of the map is approximately 2.8 Å, with lower local resolution in the RBD regions, but local refinement yields maps of the V H ab8–RBD interface at a resolution of approximately 3 Å . Cryo-EM density maps unambiguously show the location of residue 501 in the N501Y mutant spike protein ectodomains . The interface between the RBD and V H ab8 is well defined, with key interactions at the interface mediated by residues in the stretch between V483 and S494, along with a few other interactions contributed by noncontiguous RBD residues . Residue 501 of the spike protein RBD is at the periphery of the footprint of V H ab8 and shows no evidence of interactions with the antibody. The presence of the mutation thus appears not to influence interactions between the RBD and V H ab8. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. Structure of V H ab8 bound to the N501Y mutant spike protein trimer. . Local refinement of the RBD–Fab ab1 interface improves the resolution to approximately 3 Å, enabling unambiguous placement of Y501 as well as the residues involved in the contact between the RBD and Fab ab1 . Residue 501 is at the periphery of the Fab ab1 footprint, with Ser 30 of Fab ab1 in a position to interact with this residue . The N501Y mutation would thus be expected to have a small effect on the antibody binding epitope. Together, the cryo-EM structures are fully consistent with the studies presented in Fig 2 that show a small but significant effect of the N501Y mutation on Fab ab1 binding and neutralization, but with no measurable effects on V H ab8 binding or neutralization. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Structure of Fab ab1 bound to the N501Y mutant spike protein trimer. . There are several regions such as the portion of the epitope in the vicinity of residue F486 that are shared across ACE2 and the 2 antibodies . However, there are marked differences near residue 501, which is completely within the ACE2 footprint, at the very edge of the ab1 footprint, and well outside the ab8 footprint . ACE2 binding has been observed only to RBDs in the up position, likely because of steric constraints in accommodating ACE2 in the down conformation. However, the stoichiometry of ACE2 binding to the trimeric spike can be variable. Negative stain experiments show that populations of spike proteins with 1, 2, or 3 ACE2 receptors bound are obtained , and consistent with the binding studies, we find that a higher number of ACE2 receptors bind N501Y spikes as compared to unmutated spikes when the incubation is carried out under similar conditions. In cryo-EM experiments, Fab ab1 also binds the RBD in only the up position , but in contrast, the much smaller V H ab8 fragment binds the RBD in both up and down positions . Despite these differences, and the fact that ACE2, V H ab8, and Fab ab1 each have distinctive directions of approach in their contact with the RBD, there is a good match in the RBD binding footprint between V H ab8, Fab ab1, and ACE2 , accounting for the potent neutralization by the V H Fc ab8 and IgG1 ab1 antibodies . The location of residue 501 at the outer edge of the contact zone for the Fab ab1 complex and outside the zone of contact for V H ab8 complex provides a structural rationale for the findings we describe here on the differential effects of the N501Y mutation on binding and neutralization by these 2 antibodies . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. Comparison of the structures of complexes formed by the spike protein ectodomain with the ACE2 ectodomain, V H ab8, and Fab ab1. . Pseudovirus neutralization assay SARS-CoV-2 S N501Y plasmid was obtained from SARS-CoV-2 S plasmid  HexaPro ectodomains.  Representative micrograph.  with the previously published structure of the unmutated construct  Representative micrograph.  Analysis of cell entry of N501Y or unmutated SARS-CoV-2 S pseudotyped viral particles. N501Y or unmutated SARS-CoV-2 S pseudotyped virus was normalized for p24 levels and incubated with HEK293T-ACE2 cells for 48 h prior to cell lysis and luciferase activity quantification.  Representative micrograph selected from the total dataset for the unmutated  Representative micrograph.  Representative micrograph. (B) Representative 2D class averages. (C) Cryo-EM data processing workflow. (D–I) Fourier shell correlation (FSC) between 2 half maps (red) and between the refined map and model (blue), with local resolution estimation and viewing direction distribution, for class 1 (D–F) and class 2 (G–I). (J) FSC between 2 half maps of local refinement (red) and between the locally refined map and the model (blue). (K) Local resolution estimation of the locally refined map.  (TIF) S1 Table. Biophysical parameters.  (DOCX) S2 Table. Spike protein RBD residues that interact with ACE2 and various antibodies.  (DOCX) S1 Raw Images.  (PDF) Acknowledgments We thank Abel Gebresellasie and Brad Ross for their assistance with the maintenance of electron microscopes, and Peter Axerio-Cilies for helpful discussions. We thank TRIUMF and its personnel for help with the infrastructure supporting the operation of a Glacios electron microscope. 