Missense variants are present amongst the healthy population, but some of them are causative of human diseases. A classification of variants associated with “healthy” or “diseased” states is therefore not always straightforward. A deeper understanding of the nature of missense variants in health and disease, the cellular processes they may affect, and the general molecular principles which underlie these differences is essential to offer mechanistic explanations of the true impact of pathogenic variants. Here, we have formalised a statistical framework which enables robust probabilistic quantification of variant enrichment across full-length proteins, their domains, and 3D structure-defined regions. Using this framework, we validate and extend previously reported trends of variant enrichment in different protein structural regions , specific constituent “domains” of proteins . For each level, we analyse variant enrichment in full-length entities . These include protein structural information  Levels of the protein anatomy. At the protein/domain level, the number of missense variants in a protein or domain is compared to the number of missense variants in the whole dataset which localise to defined proteins/domains. At the domain-type level, the number of missense variants in a particular Pfam defined domain-type is compared to the total number of missense variants which localise to any Pfam domain-type. These calculations are referred to as the “full-length” protein/domain/domain-type variant enrichment in this manuscript, in contrast with the calculations at regions of protein anatomy defined next. , allowing for intuitive interpretation. For details, please read S1 Text . We also quantified the robustness of such quantification of variant enrichment: The significance of the enrichment/depletion of missense variants, in terms of their density, is assessed by comparison to simulated null distributions, in which the number of missense variants is kept identical to that observed in the data, but their positions within the protein are randomised. This goes beyond similar studies . Some proteins in the latter group also show enrichment in interacting interfaces, but a clear depletion of mutations at the surface is evident. The segregation of these 2 groups in terms of cancer driver status has strong statistical support . This reflects the potential disruption, caused by such mutations, of structurally and functionally important sites [ 20 , 21 , 25 ]. The enrichment of ClinVar variants is further demonstrated by their tendency to affect residues which are highly connected when considering network representations of protein structures  and that this enrichment is due to a small subset of proteins which harbour a large number of variants at interface regions. Genes in which these variants reside may be putative driver genes  The density of mutations in different protein regions, calculated using Eq 1 . Density values . ClinVar and COSMIC variants are depleted in inter-domain disordered regions and enriched in intra-domain ordered regions. In contrast, gnomAD variants , ClinVar variants appear enriched in terms of the density of missense variants close to phosphorylation sites but not significantly so in comparison to the simulated null background; this may be again due to data sparsity, as suggested by large bootstrapped confidence intervals . COSMIC cancer gene variants are also close to phosphorylation sites; however, COSMIC noncancer gene variants, which appear depleted in terms of variant density, are also significantly enriched close to phosphorylation sites in comparison to simulated null distributions . This indicates that, in agreement with a number of other studies [ 35 , 36 ], the disruption of phosphorylation sites may play a particularly important role in cancer. In contrast to phosphorylation sites, all datasets appear depleted of variants close to ubiquitination sites . These analyses conclude that the enrichment of missense variants at various structural features consistently segregate population variants from disease-associated ones. For the majority of structural regions defined here, the greatest, most consistent distinction is always seen between common and ClinVar variants, provided that the data are not too sparse. We also observed different patterns of pathway enrichment for variants in surfaces, cores, and interfaces  and in each structural regions  are depicted. Here, domain-types which are enriched in variants only in the COSMIC and ClinVar datasets can be seen, including known drug targets such as tyrosine kinase , both of which play an important role in cancer [ 39 , 40 ]. Some domain-types . This could suggest that these domains take part in functions for which it is desirable to maintain diversity within a population; however, little is known about either domain-type  VES at the full-length domain-type level. Bubble sizes are scaled by the adjusted p -value of the VES statistic.  for those domain-types with structural coverage. The majority of domains are enriched in gnomAD , such as G protein-coupled receptors . By analysing drug availability together with variant enrichment, this approach allows for more informed decisions in selecting new therapeutic targets. For example, there are domain-types which could be targeted by few or no drugs but are enriched in COSMIC and/or ClinVar variants. This could offer a starting point to prioritise drug discovery efforts for these domain-types. For domain-types already targetable by drugs, our analysis highlights domains to which multiple disease-associated variants localise, which could give scope for drug repurposing or redesign  calculated for each dataset. The pathway enrichment scores were then subjected to clustering and Principal Component Analysis . The cluster visualised in orange is primarily composed of terms associated with cancer, growth, and proliferation, whereas that coloured in pink contains pathways associated with splicing, transcription, translation, and metabolic terms. Pathways associated with sensory perception and the immune response are found in the “green” cluster. A handful of metabolic pathways also localise to this cluster; however, these appear to be more associated with environmental response and adaptation than those pathways found in the “pink” cluster; for example, pathways associated with the metabolism of drugs and xenobiotics are found here. For brevity, the “orange,” “pink,” and “green” clusters will be termed the “proliferation,” “nucleotide processing,” and “response” clusters, respectively, for the remainder of this text. A list of pathways assigned to each cluster is given in S7 Data . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Pathway clusters defined according to protein-wise variant enrichment.  Pathway terms visualised for the “proliferation” . Additionally, COSMIC variants are separated from ClinVar variants along the third principal component . Closer inspection of the pathway enrichment data for the top . “Response” pathways appear to be enriched in variants in all 4 datasets, while “proliferation” pathways are consistently enriched in COSMIC variants alongside enrichment in ClinVar variants in a subset of these pathways. Enrichment in ClinVar variants is apparent for specific “nucleotide processing” functions, e.g., ribosomes. Proteomics and transcriptomics features are associated with variant localisation Proteins, of course, do not function in isolation but in the crowded environment of the cell . Therefore, the properties of proteins in cells, including their quantities, turnover rates, and thermal stability, can crucially affect the fitness of a protein to perform its function. Here, we ask if variant enrichments are associated with these proteomics features. We have made use of large-scale proteomics data, including protein abundance data for various organs from PaxDb , proteomics surveys of protein half-lives and thermal stability [ 14 , 15 ], together with transcriptomics data . Extending to the entire proteome, the protein-wise VES of disease-associated variants displays positive correlations with protein abundance, expression, half-life, and thermal stability, whereas population variants exhibit the opposite trend . However, zooming into the enrichment of variants in the core of protein structures, we found that in comparison to all regions of proteins with resolved structure, proteins more enriched in ClinVar variants in the core tend to be less abundant and less stable, whereas the contrary is true for rare population variants . Thus, our results indicate 2 competing trends for disease-associated variants: . Analogous correlations for variant enrichments at protein surfaces display opposite trends to those observed at the protein cores . Due to the relative sparsity of variants which map to protein interfaces, we believe it is difficult to draw robust conclusions from any trends observed for correlations of proteomics data with variant enrichment at protein–protein interaction sites. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. The protein-wise enrichment of missense variants in comparison to protein abundance, expression, and stability. Spearman correlations for missense variant enrichment  Functional enrichment of proteins in KEGG pathways according to Tm. The NES for each pathway is shown on the vertical axis. KEGG pathways are listed on the horizontal axis and grouped to the 3 clusters as defined in Fig 4 . See S11 Fig for a complete list of pathways depicted here. S10 Data contains the underlying data. KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; NES, Normalised Enrichment Score; Tm, melting temperature; VES, Variant Enrichment Score.  We highlight two more observations in terms of the interplay between proteomics features. First, the various proteomics features examined here are interdependent. Protein abundance and thermal stability are significantly correlated with one another , albeit with a low correlation coefficient. The correlation values displayed in Fig 5 are also typically of a weak effect. Therefore, the interplay between variant enrichment and proteomics features appear multifaceted and complex. Secondly, in the analysis of protein abundance, the trends observed with variant enrichment at both full-length proteins and specifically the protein core are less pronounced for cell line data and break down for extracellular fluids . The correlation is most evident for tissues containing long-lived cell-types, such as the brain, ovary, and testis. Transcriptomics data  again reinforce this picture, albeit with less contrast between datasets . An exception to this is protein thermal stability: Pathways which belong to the “proliferation” cluster are clearly enriched in proteins of lower stability than the other 2 clusters . This suggests that proliferation-related proteins may be vulnerable to disruption by mutations which localise to their already unstable cores. Taken together, these analyses provide fine molecular details into defining both the resilience towards variants, and the sensitivity towards variants, for a given protein . If more stringent MAF thresholds are used to define rare variants, their properties move towards those of disease-associated variants but still remain closest to those of common variants . A visible separation between common and rare variants, especially in the pathway analysis, can only be seen if an extreme MAF cutoff  As for Fig 4B , but only the first 2 PCs are depicted, and, in separated panels, increasingly stringent MAFs used to define rare variants. MAF cutoffs of 0.01 , 0.001  and rank them by 2 in silico variant impact predictors, REVEL  and CADD . Based on the scores provided by these predictors, we proceeded to compare “tolerable” and “damaging” variants labelled by these predictions in terms of the features we discussed above. The majority of ClinVar variants were classified damaging , whereas the majority of COSMIC and gnomAD variants were deemed tolerable. Under our chosen cutoff . We found that damaging variants are enriched in protein cores and interacting interfaces while depleted in protein surfaces , similar to the ClinVar and COSMIC variants above . Tolerable variants show the opposite trends which resemble that of the gnomAD variants. Similarly, protein stability and abundance also segregate tolerable from damaging variants in the same way for ClinVar/COSMIC versus gnomAD variants : Damaging variants tend to localise to more stable and more abundant proteins. However, such variants are more likely to be found in the core of proteins which are less stable and less abundant. These distinctions described here are also present if variants are binned using CADD scores . These data indicate that the molecular features that we discovered via comparing ClinVar, COSMIC, and gnomAD variants are independent from such crude labelling based on the databases from which these variant data are collected. Rather, they are associated with variant impact, as assessed by orthogonal measures independent from our approach. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 7. Orthogonal variant impact predictions validate structural and proteomics features.  The correlation between VES calculated at the whole-protein level  The enrichment of surface, core, and interacting interface over variants ranked by REVEL score. The enrichment score from the GSEA procedure was plotted here. The absence of enrichment would result in a flat line at 0 . This further demonstrates the validity of structural localisation as a reliable feature to distinguish between tolerable and damaging variants. Finally, tolerable and damaging variants are also enriched indistinct functional pathways . Some “response” pathways tend to be associated with tolerable variants, while “proliferation” and “nucleotide processing” pathways are more associated with damaging variants, analogous to the analysis on disparate variant sets as we see previously in Fig 4 . Taken together, using orthogonal variant impact predictors, we validate that structural and proteomics features do indeed hold segregating power for tolerable and damaging variants. This suggests the use of the features discovered in our analyses above as a promising avenue to construct next-generation variant impact predictors . Additionally, we find that the properties of rare variants remain close to those of common variants. These findings contrast with other observations  which suggest that common variants have more impact on molecular function than rare variants. In this study, only for a few proteomics properties, such as the thermal stability and abundance of the affected proteins, common variants appear closer in character to disease-associated variants than to rare variants. However, for these few properties, the results might not be robust due to sparsity of the data. Rare genetic variations are abundant across individuals [ 51 , 52 ], with some predicted to confer a regulatory impact  or loss of function . Alhuzimi and colleagues  suggest that the properties of genes enriched in rare population variants are similar to those enriched in disease-associated variants and are thus good candidates for discovering novel disease associations. Instead, we show that proteins enriched in rare variants are, based on the associated functional pathways, most similar to those enriched in common variants . Moreover, our results show that population variants implicate functions mainly associated with environmental response , in agreement with results from evolutionary studies reviewed in . We have dissected the extent of variant enrichment in diverse datasets and across different protein regions . Whereas protein structural information has been utilised to annotate genetic variants and prioritise impactful variants for further investigations, many of the published methods focus on 3D-structural “hotspots,” prioritising variants which cluster in three-dimensional space  [ 20 , 21 , 25 , 26 , 34 ] but also shed light on the debate as to whether somatic cancer variants are enriched in interface regions, by simulating null distributions of variants . These simulations show that it is essential to consider that variants from different datasets are not uniformly and randomly distributed throughout the proteome. A similar simulation-based approach was taken by Gress and colleagues , but they found no significant enrichment for COSMIC variants in interface regions. While they analysed a filtered set of mutations likely to play a driver role, we investigated all somatic variants and addressed separately mutations that localise to defined cancer and noncancer genes. Our analysis has of course been limited by the number of proteins with available structural data, despite enrichment with homologous structures. We are also still limited by the structural coverage of protein interactions; although enough data exist to uncover broad trends, our analyses of protein–protein interaction sites generally lacked statistical power. Moreover, it is likely that a more detailed picture will emerge if different classes of protein interactions . Together with functional pathways and structural localisation, we have identified a set of features, based on which different parts of the proteome could be assessed for their tendency to be enriched in disease-associated or population variants . Population variants are enriched on protein surfaces but depleted in core and interacting sites, and tend to be found in less abundant, less stable proteins. These features could potentially contribute to “resilience” towards missense variants, by limiting the impact on proteins harbouring such variants. On the other hand, disease-associated variants localise preferentially to proteins which are highly expressed and abundant . However, when selectively looking at variants mapping to protein cores, which presumably could bring about the most dramatic impact on fitness, disease-associated variants are actually associated with cores of less stable, less abundant proteins . Such proteins are conceivably easier to inflict damage at the core  and be eliminated via selection; these lethal variants suffer from undersampling in the data analysed here. On the other hand, some variants which localise to sensitive proteins may bring benefits to cell viability; these variants could ascertain a role in driving cancers. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 8. Summary of analyses. Here, we have explored patterns of structural localisation, abundance, and stability for proteins enriched in disease-associated and population variants respectively. These molecular attributes determine the resilience and sensitivity of the proteins towards missense variants . Here, by annotating structural and proteomics features to the proteins harbouring variants, we offer explanations of the possible mechanisms through which a variant might confer its impact, enriching information provided by variant impact scores which appears intuitive yet could imply vastly different molecular underpinnings . The detailed set of protein features we provide could also be harnessed for more systematic improvement of variant impact interpretation. Firstly, the analysis concerning protein stability suggests it is important to consider the baseline stability of the protein in question when assessing the impact a variant could bring. A number of algorithms have used the estimated change in protein stability upon mutation , which lends support to these conclusions. However, we also point out, by considering variants at the protein core, that a mutation in an already unstable protein is more likely to result in complete/partial unfolding under physiological conditions. This is likely to be relevant to globular proteins, whereas for other types of proteins, e.g., intrinsically disordered proteins, function will be related less to the fold and the density of the protein core. These factors should be brought into consideration when interpreting the impact of missense variants. Secondly, we show that the combination of protein structures, functional pathways, and proteomics measurements has the potential to offer valuable mechanistic insights into the properties of variants. For example, it can be clearly seen that population variants are most enriched on protein surface  and take part in pathways belonging to the “proliferation” cluster . Such pathways also appear to be enriched in proteins with less thermal stability , suggesting a possible mechanistic basis underlying the localisation of variants  of variant enrichment with proteomics features complements a body of research which concludes that the rate of protein evolution correlates negatively with protein expression and abundance , the extent of which has been found to be tissue specific; those tissues with a high neuron density demonstrating the highest anticorrelation . Consistent with this, we found the largest negative correlation for the protein-wise enrichment of rare variants, from the gnomAD dataset, with protein abundance in the brain and, interestingly, also in the ovary and testis, which both harbour long-lived germline progenitor cells . Purportedly, the life span of long-lived cells renders them more sensitive to , which includes the mapping of targeted drugs, besides providing another feature for the characterisation of variants, will allow for more informed decisions in optimising therapeutic strategies. For example, targets with few population variants could be selected, to minimise differential drug response due to genetic differences between individuals. Interestingly, it has recently been shown that genetic variants in such domains . We first define a list of “levels” of the anatomy, namely:  The number of missense variants is modelled as a binomial variable. The cumulative distributive function of this binomial variable is taken as a VES for the level examined.  was used to assess the missense variant enrichment of a given entity , and the two-tailed binomial test was used to assess the significance of enrichment/depletion.  ≤ k ) is the cumulative probability of observing k missense variants in the chosen entity. We took the approach used in  to identify protein interfaces enriched in cancer variants and generalised this to look not only at interfaces but other regions and levels defined in our protein anatomy , to avoid the inclusion of variants which could have arisen from the process of affinity maturation. For all calculations of enrichment and simulations involving protein or domain “regions” . ; for simplicity and consistency, we use the VES metric for variant enrichment/depletion within a given entity  S2 Fig. Comparison of VES and density metrics.   S4 Fig. The landscape of variant enrichment over a list of domain-types most enriched in pathogenic and population variants.   of pathway enrichment of protein-wise VES.   S7 Fig. Spearman correlations for missense variant enrichment, protein stability, and abundance.   S9 Fig. The Spearman correlation of the enrichment of missense variants with protein half-lives.   S11 Fig. Functional enrichment of proteins in KEGG pathways according to thermal stability.   S13 Fig. Functional enrichment of proteins in KEGG pathways according to transcript expression.   S15 Fig. The density of rare mutations from the gnomAD data in different protein regions.   S17 Fig. The association between VES and protein stability for variants scored by CADD and REVEL.   S19 Fig. Pathway enrichment analysis for tolerable and damaging variants as defined by CADD.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  (ZIP) S1 Appendix. Detailed description of data files.  (PDF) Acknowledgments We thank Dr Jens Kleinjung for his critical reading of and comments on this manuscript, and members of the Fraternali group for valuable discussion. 