MgtE is a Mg 2+ channel conserved in organisms ranging from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, including humans, and plays an important role in Mg 2+ homeostasis. The previously determined MgtE structures in the Mg 2+ -bound, closed-state, and structure-based functional analyses of MgtE revealed that the binding of Mg 2+ ions to the MgtE cytoplasmic domain induces channel inactivation to maintain Mg 2+ homeostasis. There are no structures of the transmembrane . The crystal structure of the Mg 2+ -free cytoplasmic domain exhibits a more relaxed conformation, where the N domain is dissociated from the CBS domain and where each subunit of the CBS domain and plug helix dimer are also separated from each other, which may unlock the closed conformation of the channel . Consistent with this, electrophysiological recording of MgtE showed that a high concentration of cellular Mg 2+ inhibits the channel gating of MgtE, whereas MgtE is in equilibrium between the open and closed states of the channel at a low concentration of cellular Mg 2+ . However, due to the lack of a MgtE TM domain structure in Mg 2+ -free conditions, the Mg 2+ -dependent structural changes in MgtE, particularly those in the TM domain, remain unknown, and thus, the channel-opening mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we determined the cryo-electron microscopy  MgtE dimer in the presence of Mg 2+ , but the binding did not occur at a high concentration of Mg 2+ . Consistent with this, isothermal titration calorimetry . We then performed patch clamp analysis of full-length MgtE using Escherichia coli giant spheroplasts at 0 mM MgCl 2 in the presence and absence of Fab705 and observed little change in the open probabilities upon addition of Fab705 into the bath solution . Furthermore, in the patch clamp recording, when we tested a high concentration of MgCl 2 . These results demonstrate that Fab705 binds to Mg 2+ -free MgtE but not to MgtE with high Mg 2+ concentrations and neither positively nor negatively modulate channel opening at 0 mM Mg 2+ . These functional properties of Fab705 are desirable for the determination of the MgtE structure under Mg 2+ -free conditions because it does not affect channel gating under Mg 2+ -free conditions, particularly in an inhibitory manner. Thus, the utilization of Fab705 enables the gating motions of MgtE to be captured by cryo-EM. Cryo-EM of the MgtE-Fab complex in Mg 2+ -free conditions To determine the structure of MgtE in the absence of Mg 2+ or other divalent cations, the full-length MgtE-Fab705 complex was reconstituted in PMAL-C8 amphipol and subjected to cryo-EM single-particle analysis . A 3D reconstruction of the cryo-EM images was performed to reach an overall resolution of 3.7 Å, with C2 symmetry imposed , and the cryo-EM density of the TM domain was clear enough to build an atomic model . An additional cryo-EM density map of the TM domain was calculated at an approximately 3.1 Å resolution by signal subtraction and additional 3D refinement . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. Cryo-EM of the MgtE-Fab complex. , and thus, the absence of the MgtE cytoplasmic domain in the cryo-EM density was probably because of the high structural flexibility of the Mg 2+ -free cytoplasmic domain [ 30 , 31 ]. The highly flexible nature of the Mg 2+ -free MgtE cytoplasmic domain in our cryo-EM structure is consistent with previous studies conducted on MgtE by high-speed atomic force microscopy . The Fab705 molecules are bound to the cytoplasmic side of the MgtE TM domain, and this binding is mediated mainly by electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds, primarily involving the residues in the TM2 to TM3 linker and the TM4 to TM5 linker . Among these residues involved in Fab binding, Arg345 interacts with Glu217 in the CBS domain, and Asp418 binds to Mg 2+ ions to bridge the TM domain and plug helices in the full-length MgtE structure in the Mg 2+ -bound form . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. Overall structure.  reveals the spatial collision between the Fabs and the Mg 2+ -bound cytoplasmic domain, mainly at the N domain , whereas the N domain is dissociated from the CBS domain in the absence of Mg 2+ : This explains why we did not observe binding between MgtE and Fab705 at a high concentration of Mg 2+ . Notably, in FSEC analysis, the addition of 20 mM Mg 2+ into the sample of the MgtE-Fab complex sample, which was preformed before the addition of Mg 2+ , disrupted complex formation, where we did not see a Fab-dependent FSEC peak shift , consistent with the patch clamp recording at a high concentration of MgCl 2 . These results indicate that after Fab binding, a high concentration of Mg 2+ ions can still close the MgtE channel by disrupting the MgtE-Fab complex. We then compared our structure with the previously determined Mg 2+ -bound, closed-state MgtE structure . The MgtE structure in Mg 2+ -free conditions has a wider pore on the cytoplasmic side than that in the previously determined structure in the presence of Mg 2+ ions . Notably, at the cytoplasmic end of the pore, the side chains of Asn424 of both subunits face each other in the Mg 2+ -bound closed structure , whereas in our new Mg 2+ -free structure, the side chains of Asn424 are turned away from each other  to form a wider cytoplasmic pore, suggesting that this region might form the cytoplasmic gate. In addition, Asn332 is in close contact with Asn424, seemingly contributing to the formation of the cytoplasmic gate . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Ion-conducting pore.  compared to cells expressing wild-type MgtE, suggesting that the disruption of the cytoplasmic gate led to increased Ni 2+ uptake. In contrast to the opening of the cytoplasmic side of the pore, the pore remains closed around the Ala317 residues on the periplasmic side, where the pore radius is approximately 1 Å  in both MgtE structures in the presence and absence of Mg 2+ ions, indicating that the current structure would remain in a nonconductive conformation on the periplasmic side. Cytoplasmic pore-opening motions Consistent with the wider opening of the ion-conducting pore on the cytoplasmic side, the TM helices, including the pore-forming TM2 and TM5 helices, are located in exterior positions with respect to the center of the ion-conducting pore under Mg 2+ -free conditions . Furthermore, the TM3 and TM4 helices have also moved away from the center, as they interact with both the TM2 and TM5 helices . For instance, compared to the structure of the Mg 2+ -bound state, Thr344 at TM2, in the Mg 2+ -free state, Asp348 at TM3, Leu415 at TM4, and Ala420 at TM5 are rotated by approximately 8°, 5°, 8°, and approximately 14°, respectively, clockwise from the central axis along the pore and have moved away from the central axis by approximately 3 Å, approximately 3 Å, 3 Å, and approximately 1 Å, respectively. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. Cytoplasmic pore-opening motions. . Using Cu 2+ phenanthroline as a catalyst, cross-linking experiments were performed with these mutants . Wild-type MgtE does not contain any endogenous cysteine residues, and the addition of MgCl 2 to MgtE would shift the equilibrium from the Mg 2+ -free form to the Mg 2+ -bound form, according to the previously reported limited proteolysis assay of MgtE . The double cysteine mutant T336C/L421C exhibited a strong band corresponding to the MgtE dimer in the presence of Mg 2+ at a concentration gradient , consistent with the Mg 2+ -dependent structural changes observed in our cryo-EM structure. To further support the current conformation of the MgtE TM domain structure, we performed MD simulations starting from the Mg 2+ -free MgtE TM domain structure embedded in the lipid bilayer. The results of the 3-μs simulation in the absence of Mg 2+ showed that the structures of the MgtE TM domain are mostly stable . The cytoplasmic pore remained open, with Cα distances between Leu421 , whereas the periplasmic gate region site remained closed, with stable Cα distances between Ala317 . The results further support the cytoplasmic pore opening of MgtE under Mg 2+ -free conditions, as we observed in the cryo-EM structure. At the same time, we also do not exclude the possibility that we might see some structural changes if we run the MD simulation for a much longer duration. Kink motions of the TM helices for channel gating Detailed observation and comparison of the MgtE structures further revealed the kink motions of TM2 at Gly325 and Gly328 by approximately 10° and of TM5 at Gly435 by approximately 10° . Since the TM2 and TM5 helices form the ion-conducting pore, these kink motions seemingly enable the TM2 and TM5 helices to expand the pore on the cytoplasmic side. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 6. Kink motions of the TM helices. . In particular, mutation of the strictly conserved Gly328 completely eliminated the growth complementation activity . These results indicated that these glycine residues at the kinks of the TM2 and TM5 helices are important for the channel activity of MgtE. Discussion In this work, we determined the cryo-EM structure of MgtE in Mg 2+ -free conditions. The utilization of antibodies has been successfully applied to the single-particle analysis of membrane proteins [ 33 – 37 ]. Notably, in our MgtE-Fab complex structure, the ordered region of MgtE , which would be desirable for determining the MgtE structure under Mg 2+ -free conditions  because Fabs with inhibitory effects on channel gating may hinder structural changes in the TM domain, which would not be suitable to gain structural insights into the channel gating. Based on this structure, we further conducted structure-based functional analysis, and our new findings together with our previous research on MgtE provided structural insights into the gating mechanism of MgtE, as discussed below. First, under high Mg 2+ concentrations, the binding of intracellular Mg 2+ to the cytoplasmic domain of MgtE, including the plug helices, stabilizes the tightly packed, closed conformation of the protein, leading to pore closure in the TM domain through extensive interactions between the plug helices and the TM domain, mainly via helices TM2 and TM5 on the cytoplasmic side  . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 7. Proposed mechanism. A cartoon representation of the proposed gating motions in the presence of Mg 2+ . In such disordered conditions, the plug helices of MgtE cannot tightly interact with the TM domain to lock the channel in the closed state anymore, unlike the structure in the Mg 2+ -bound state . In other words, under Mg 2+ -free conditions, the high flexibility of the cytoplasmic domain leads to the loss of the interactions between the plug helices and the TM domains, unlocking the TM domain conformation from the closed state. Highly flexible domain motions in the MgtE cytoplasmic domain were also observed by HS-AFM , in the crystal structure of the Mg 2+ -free cytoplasmic domain structure , and via MD simulations of MgtE . In particular, in a previous report on HS-AFM , Haruyama and colleagues observed a jagged topography of MgtE in the absence of Mg 2+ under HS-AFM from the end-up orientation . Intriguingly, similar types of regulatory mechanisms, in which the cytoplasmic domain undergoes a transition from a rigid conformation to a highly flexible or disordered state upon the release of ligands from the cytoplasmic domain, have been observed in other channels/transporters such as the CLC Cl − channel and the OpuA ABC transporter, which also possesses a CBS domain [ 38 , 39 ]. Following the unlocking of the TM domain due to the high flexibility of the Mg 2+ -free cytoplasmic domain, we observed the structural differences of the TM domains between our cryo-EM structure and the previously determined Mg 2+ -bound, inactivated structure . In our cryo-EM structure, the ion-conducting pore is wide open on the cytoplasmic side but still closed on the periplasmic side , indicating that the pore is still nonconductive. According to previous patch clamp recording results, MgtE is in equilibrium between the open and closed states under low-Mg 2+ conditions rather than in a constitutively open state . Therefore, our cryo-EM structure of MgtE may represent a preopening state of MgtE under low-Mg 2+ conditions, where the pore is partially opened on the cytoplasmic side due to loss of the tight interactions with the plug helices . Intriguingly, after the 3-μs MD simulation of the Mg 2+ -free, MgtE TM domain structure was performed by adding Mg 2+ ion to the Mg 2+ binding site in the pore; the entrance region of the periplasmic side between the TM1 and TM2 helices became partially opened, with Cα distances between Glu311 , whereas the periplasmic gate remained nonconductive, with Cα distances between Ala317 . To fully understand the gating cycle of the MgtE channel, a structure in a fully opening state is still required. Furthermore, whereas the previous results are most consistent with the bacterial MgtE acting as an ion channel [ 14 , 16 , 17 ], since some of the SLC41 proteins, the eukaryotic counterparts of the bacterial MgtE, are Na + -driven Mg 2+ transporters , the understanding of their transport mechanism would require structural analysis of eukaryotic SLC41 proteins. In our structure, the structural changes in the TM domain occur mainly at the TM2 and TM5 helices , and the glycine residues in the TM2 and TM5 helices enable the kink motions of the TM2 and TM5 helices for cytoplasmic pore opening . We verified these structural changes by biochemical cross-linking experiments and genetic assays . Notably, none of these functional experiments to verify the structural changes were performed in the presence of Fab705, suggesting that these structural changes in our MgtE-Fab complex structure are unlikely to be nonphysiological artifacts due to the use of Fab for structure determination. Taken together, our structural and functional analyses provide mechanistic insight into the channel-opening mechanisms of MgtE, particularly cytoplasmic pore opening. Materials and methods Preparation of the MgtE-Fab complex The full-length T . thermophilus MgtE gene was subcloned into a pET28a-derived vector containing an N-terminal hexahistidine tag and a human rhinovirus 3C . The sequence alignment figure was generated using Clustal Omega  and ESPript 3.0 . The MgtE pore shown in Fig 4 was calculated by HOLE . Preparation of antibody fragments Mouse monoclonal antibodies against MgtE were raised by an established method . Briefly, a proteoliposome antigen was prepared by reconstituting purified, functional MgtE at high density in phospholipid vesicles consisting of a 10:1 mixture of egg phosphatidylcholine  was added at a final concentration of 20 mM to the MgtE mutant proteins before removal by SEC, and then diluted to 0.5 mg/ml with buffer B containing 0.05%  and temperature  was transformed with MgtE or MgtE mutant plasmids and grown on LB medium plates containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin and 100 mM MgSO 4 . Each transformant was inoculated in liquid LB medium containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin and 100 mM MgSO 4 and incubated at 37°C overnight with shaking. The liquid samples were diluted 1:100 with the same medium and grown until the OD600 reached 0.6. The sample cultures were then serially diluted 10-fold in LB medium containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin, spotted onto assay plates, and incubated at 37°C overnight, as indicated in Fig 6C . In the Ni 2+ sensitivity assay, the isogenic magnesium-prototrophic wild-type E . coli strain . Western blot analysis The Mg 2+ -auxotrophic E . coli strain  FSEC analysis of MgtE-Fab complex formation. The MgtE-Fab complex was formed by adding Fab to MgtE in 0 mM MgCl 2  S2 Fig. SEC and SDS-PAGE of the Fab-MgtE complex.  Overview of the data processing workflow, including particle picking, classification, and 3D refinement. All processing steps were performed in RELION.  Representative EM density maps contoured at 4.0 σ. The TM1 helix  Side view of the EM density map for the TM domain obtained by signal subtraction, colored according to local resolution, calculated using RELION.  and of the corresponding region in full-length MgtE in the Mg 2+ -bound form  S7 Fig. Structural comparisons. Superimpositions of our cryo-EM structure of the MgtE-Fab complex under Mg 2+ -free conditions and the Mg 2+ -free cytoplasmic domain structure  S8 Fig. MD simulations. .  and under Mg 2+ -free conditions  ITC profiles of MgtE with Fab705 in the presence of 0 mM MgCl 2  S12 Fig. Patch clamp recording of MgtE using E . coli giant spheroplasts.  S14 Fig. Western blot of the MgtE glycine mutants. Uncropped western blots are provided in S1 Raw Images.   S1 Raw Images. Uncropped western blots from S14 Fig .  (TIF) Acknowledgments We thank the staff scientists at the Center for Biological Imaging, Institute of Biophysics, and National Center for Protein Science Shanghai (Chinese Academy of Sciences) for technical support with cryo-EM data collection (project numbers: CBIapp20180107, CBIapp201807006, CBIapp201807007, 2017-NFPS-PT-001632, and 2018-NFPS-PT-002187); Yumi Sato for technical assistance in the generation of antibodies; Namba Laboratory members for technical support with cryo-EM data collection; Dr. Hideaki E. Kato (University of Tokyo) for critical comments on the manuscript; and Drs. Chia-Hsueh Lee (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital) and Muneyoshi Ichikawa (NAIST) for their technical advice on cryo-EM data processing. 