Renal cell carcinoma . We found that the lovastatin-treated group had a significantly lower serum level of cholesterol  but greater tumor size compared to the control group . Tumors in the lovastatin-treated group also weighed more than those in the control group at necropsy . By examining the resected tumor tissue, we found that the lactate content in the tumor tissue of the lovastatin-treated group was significantly higher by 25% ± 8.1% ; the levels of VEGF and glutathione . Moreover, tumor neovascularization testing  and CD31 staining  indicated that the angiogenic response in the lovastatin treatment group was significantly stronger than that in the saline group. These results suggested that treatment with HMGCR inhibitors had made the microenvironment of the tumor more conducive to growth. It has been established that elevated lactate levels in tumors often precede increased levels of glycolysis in tumor cells. Glycolysis provides energy and materials for the rapid proliferation of tumor cells and creates an acidic and inflammatory TME, thereby promoting tumor growth and angiogenesis. Moreover, the accelerated growth of tumors promoted acidification and hypoxia in the TME. Based on this inference, we preliminary hypothesized that HMGCR inhibition promoted tumor growth by increasing glycolysis. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 1. Inhibition of HMGCR promoted RCC tumor growth. . This finding was corroborated by the treatment of ACHN and 786-O cells with other statins at doses of 1 μM; this also caused negligible effects on cell proliferation . The results of this assay implied that HMGCR inhibition did not correlate with tumor growth via an effect on cell proliferation. Next, we measured lactate produced by ACHN and 786-O cell lines after lovastatin stimulation. At the indicated concentrations, lovastatin augmented the release of lactate into the culture medium in ACHN cells by 24% to 69% and in 786-O cells by 22% to 55% . To confirm the specificity of lactate production enhanced by lovastatin-inhibited HMGCR, we established ACHN and 786-O cells stably expressing short hairpin RNA . Consistent with the previous results, the extracellular and intracellular levels of lactate both showed elevation in HMGCR knockdown cells . The extracellular acidification rate . Furthermore, supplementation with MVA, a downstream product of HMGCR, restored lovastatin-induced lactate alterations in ACHN cells . In addition, increased lactate production was accompanied by increased consumption of glucose. This was confirmed by the direct measurement of residual glucose in the culture medium and flow cytometry analysis by the fluorescent deoxyglucose analog 2-NBDG . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. HMGCR inhibition enhanced RCC cells glycolytic.  in ACHN cells. Indeed, we found an abnormal increase in the levels of PKM2 protein in the tumor tissue of lovastatin-treated mice . The expression of PKM2 on the tumor cells of our in vitro culture model increased in response to lovastatin treatment; this occurred in both a dose- and time-dependent manner . These results were also reproduced upon treatment with other statins . Furthermore, existing reports prove that PKM2 not only acts as a rate-limiting enzyme to control the rate of glycolysis in tumor cells; it also regulates the secretion of VEGF and promotes tumor angiogenesis . Therefore, we turned our attention to PKM2. The specificity of the PKM2 regulation following the inhibition of HMGCR by statins was confirmed by both HMGCR knockdown and MVA supplementation experiments in ACHN cells . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. HMGCR inhibition enhanced PKM2 stability. . We found that a reduction in the expression of PKM2 protein level resulted in a decline in lactate production and glucose consumption; this effect could not be reversed by the further application of lovastatin . In contrast, the exogenous expression of PKM2  significantly increased lactate production and glucose consumption in ACHN cells . In addition, the level of VEGF was also augmented with the exogenous expression of PKM2 ; this was consistent with our findings from the animal model. To understand the mechanisms underlying the HMGCR inhibition-induced PKM2 up-regulation, we first measured the mRNA levels of PKM2 in ACHN cells. There was no significant change either with lovastatin treatment or with HMGCR knockdown . This suggested that the inhibition of HMGCR might affect the stability of the PKM2 protein. Furthermore, the enzymic activity of PKM2 was inversely related to the regulation of HMGCR . Cycloheximide . Moreover, a proteasome inhibitor . These data revealed that HMGCR inhibition increased the levels of PKM2 protein by slowing down degradation by the proteasome and by promoting the stability of PKM2. HSP90 is a critical regulator of PKM2 protein augmentation Heat shock protein 90 . Then, we attenuated the expression of HSP90 protein using sh RNA  and found that the effect of lovastatin on increasing PKM2 had been eliminated . Moreover, HSP90 knockdown directly reduced levels of PKM2 . These findings suggested that the inhibition of HMGCR might regulate PKM2 via HSP90. To verify this observation, we performed co-immunoprecipitation . Notably, the knockdown of HSP90 by sh RNA restored the enhanced PKM2 enzyme activity and lactate production caused by lovastatin . In addition, RT-PCR data showed that lovastatin treatment and HMGCR knockdown increased the mRNA levels of HSP90 in ACHN cells . Following the supplementation of various metabolites downstream of HMGCR, the rise in HSP90 protein concentration appeared to be attenuated to varying degrees . Furthermore, we found that the inhibition of HMGCR led to an increase in the level of heat shock transcription factor-1 . Collectively, these data indicate that HSP90 plays a critical role in the regulation of PKM2 in cells when inhibited by HMGCR. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. HMGCR inhibition increased PKM2 protein level by up-regulating HSP90 expression. . Then, we investigated whether the interaction between PKM2 and HSP90 would affect the abundance of PKM2 in ACHN cells. HSP90 sh RNA was transfected into ACHN cells and led to a reduction in PKM2 protein level with reduced HSP90 expression . In contrast, the exogenous expression of HSP90 significantly increased the abundance of PKM2 in ACHN cells . Next, we induced protein degradation in ACHN cells via CHX and found that the half-life of PKM2 changed when HSP90 was either knocked out or overexpressed . Simultaneously, MG132 restored the protein levels of PKM2 that had been reduced in response to HSP90 knockdown . Furthermore, we performed the ubiquitination assay for wild-type PKM2. Consistent with its degradation by the proteasomal pathway, PKM2 was extensively ubiquitinated in ACHN cells in which HSP90 had been knocked down . Collectively, these data indicated that HSP90 was critical for reducing the degradation and maintaining the stability of PKM2. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. HSP90 promoted the PKM2 protein stability in ACHN cells. . Notably, the PKM2 inhibitor had a better antitumor effect in the HMGCR inhibition model than in the wild type model . The changes in tumor growth were consistent with lactate levels in the tumor tissue, the release of VEGF and GSH, and the restoration of angiogenesis . In vitro assays, culture medium testing, and cell ECAR monitoring results all showed that the supplementation of Shikonin eliminated the increased lactate production and glucose consumption by lovastatin, to a level that was even lower than the control; these findings were consistent with the potent ability of Shikonin to inhibit glycolysis . These results proved that the suppression of glycolysis reversed the acceleration of tumor growth caused by HMGCR inhibition and provided antitumor effects in mice. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 6. Glycolysis suppression reverses HMGCR inhibition induced tumor growth in xenograft mice. . Recent studies indicated that the use of statins significantly increased the expression of Hsp90, while in vitro studies demonstrated that the statin-induced activation of HSP90 was associated with the phosphorylation of endothelial NO synthase . A previous study showed that the administration of atorvastatin in the human coronary artery endothelial cell model up-regulated the levels of HSF-1 protein . HSF-1 might be a key enzyme involved in the mechanism by which HMGCR regulates HSP90. However, the precise identification of the mechanisms by which HMGCR regulates HSP90 has yet to be identified. The Warburg effect shows that despite having enough oxygen, tumor cells still enhance their glycolysis pathways and use more glucose to synthesize glycolysis intermediates to maintain their cell growth, division, and survival . In this study, we found that HMGCR inhibition did not directly promote the proliferation of cells but increased the rate of glycolysis and enhance the Warburg effect of cells. Moreover, the reprogramming of cellular metabolism provides a microenvironment that is suitable for the accelerated growth of tumors. Aerobic glycolysis by a tumor has a significant interaction with effect on the TME . Enhanced glycolysis and elevated levels of lactate lead to the acidification of the TME, thus activating a variety of low pH-dependent genes that are related to tumor invasion and metastasis [ 49 , 50 ]. TME is the key regulator of carcinogenesis and is composed of many different types of cells, including duo-malignant cancer cells, cancer-associated fibroblasts  Dose-dependent lovastatin treated on the proliferation of ACHN and 786-O cells.  The effect of lovastatin or sh HMGCR intervention on the protein levels of glycolysis-related enzymes.  or HMGCR knockdown  Western blotting analysis of HSP90 after lentiviral knockdown as exemplified in ACHN cells.  Immunohistochemical staining of CD31+ in ACHN cell xenografts (scale bar: 50 μm). (B) Extracellular lactate level, (C) glucose consumption, and (D) ECAR rate of ACHN cell with or without lovastatin and Shikonin treatment. The data are represented as the mean ± SD from 3 independent experiments, *( p ≤ 0.05), **( p ≤ 0.01) or *** p ≤ 0.001). 2DG, 2-deoxy-D-glucose; ECAR, extracellular acidification rate; Glu, glucose; HMGCR, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase; Lov, lovastatin; Oligo, oligomycin; PKM2, pyruvate kinase M2; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; SK, Shikonin; wt , wild type.  (TIF) S1 Raw Images.  (PDF) 