Obesity-related renal lipotoxicity and chronic kidney disease . Malpighian tubules are excretory cells that also function in salt and water balance, similar to mammalian renal tubules [ 29 , 30 ]. Nephrocytes are podocyte-like cells that regulate the composition of the hemolymph  Diagram comparing the mammalian nephron and the Drosophila renal system. Drosophila nephrocytes share functions with mammalian podocytes of the glomerulus and also with proximal tubules. Drosophila Malpighian tubules are functionally analogous to renal tubules. . Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry . HFD is supplemented with oleic acid suggesting that the hemolymph increase of this fatty acid derives directly from the diet. High myristoleate may therefore reflect conversion from dietary oleate and is consistent with previous observations that the most abundant fatty acids in the hemolymph have an average chain length of 12 to 14 carbons . Compared to STD, HFD did not significantly alter body growth or developmental timing, but it did lead to a small increase in the size of nephrocytes . To begin characterising the effects of HFD on nephrocytes, a neutral lipid dye . GFP fused to lipid droplet–associated hydrolase . Hence, chronic exposure to HFD leads to the strong accumulation of nephrocyte lipid droplets. We also observed that HFD markedly decreased the overall volume of ER and mitochondria in nephrocytes, approximately halving the proportion of the total cell volume that each organelle occupies . These observations together show that HFD in Drosophila , as in mammals, induces renal lipid droplets and also a deficit in ER and mitochondrial volumes. HFD compromises nephrocyte endocytosis An important function of nephrocytes is to resorb circulating proteins and other macromolecules from the hemolymph via Cubn- and Amnionless-dependent endocytosis [ 31 , 33 ]. This nephrocyte endocytic function can be quantified by monitoring ex vivo uptake of the polysaccharide dextran . A combination of fluorescently labelled 10 kDa and 500 kDa dextrans has previously been used to assess size-selective filtration as well as overall endocytosis . Using this approach, we measured mean dextran intensities in nephrocytes but observed only a modest increase in the 500:10 kDa dextran intensity ratio over an ex vivo incubation time course of 3 to 20 minutes . A 30-minute ex vivo incubation time was therefore subsequently used as a robust readout for nephrocyte endocytosis rather than size-selective filtration. This assay revealed that endocytic uptake of dextran is decreased in the nephrocytes of HFD animals and, although there is cell-to-cell variability, the mean overall reduction is approximately 50% compared with STD animals . This finding is further strengthened by a modified ex vivo nephrocyte uptake assay that utilised labelled albumin. As with dextran, nephrocyte accumulation of albumin was significantly decreased by HFD . We therefore conclude that HFD compromises the key renal function of nephrocyte endocytosis. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. HFD decreases nephrocyte uptake of dextran and albumin. . CLEM analysis of nephrocytes carrying the endogenous Rab7 gene tagged with YFP myc , Rab7 :: YFP myc [YRab7,40], distinguished 5 endolysosomal compartments according to the “white,” “light,” or “dark” SEM luminal density and the Dextran and Rab7 labelling status . Comparing our CLEM analysis with previous nephrocyte studies [ 41 – 43 ] strongly suggested that the “white” compartment corresponds to a mix of Dextran + Rab7 − early endosomes and Dextran + Rab7 + endosomes . This HFD deficit is particularly striking for endosomes of less than 1 μm in diameter, and it is likely to account for the observed decrease in the capacity of nephrocytes to uptake macromolecules such as dextran. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. HFD decreases the number of nephrocyte endosomes.  to peripheral tissues . Lpp-GAL4 was used to drive chronic expression of the ATGL orthologue Brummer  in the fat body . As with HFD, fat body–specific ATGL expression in STD animals did not substantially alter growth or developmental timing, although it did decrease nephrocyte volume by approximately 25% . Importantly, this genetic manipulation was sufficient to induce robust lipid droplet accumulation in nephrocytes of STD animals, suggesting that lipid overflow from adipose tissue may also be relevant for HFD-induced renal lipid droplets . Lipid overflow from adipose tissue, like HFD, also lead to a functional deficit in nephrocyte endocytosis, as Lpp>ATGL animals also showed impaired dextran uptake . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Fat body lipolysis induces and Cubn-dependent endocytosis blocks renal lipid droplets. . With the preceding results, this provides evidence supporting the conclusion that HFD leads to excess fat circulating in the hemolymph . Boosting ATGL expression rescues HFD-induced nephrocyte dysfunction Our results show that excess circulating lipids are endocytosed by nephrocytes and targeted to lipid droplets. This raises an important question—what, if any, contribution do lipid droplets make towards HFD-induced renal dysfunction? To identify unambiguous functions for lipid droplets, rather than for fatty acid metabolism more generally, we targeted 2 enzymes with direct substrates/products corresponding to the triglyceride cargo of droplets, DGAT1/Midway and ATGL/Brummer. Importantly, nephrocyte lipid droplets in HFD animals were efficiently inhibited either by knocking down DGAT1 . Systematically comparing the HFD phenotypes of these 2 genetic manipulations allows the roles of lipid droplet triglycerides to be parsed into synthesis versus lipolysis functions. This comparative strategy revealed that DGAT1 knockdown in HFD nephrocytes gave small or nonsignificant changes in mitochondrial and ER volumes, respectively . Blocking lipid droplets via ATGL expression, however, did significantly increase both mitochondrial and ER volumes in HFD nephrocytes, consistent with partial restoration of these cell parameters towards STD values . Using the ratiometric dye BODIPY 581/591 C11 to detect lipid peroxidation, we observed no difference between STD and HFD nephrocytes . Furthermore, lipid peroxidation on HFD did not significantly change with ATGL expression, but it was strongly elevated with DGAT1 knockdown . Together, these results demonstrate that abrogation of lipid droplets in HFD nephrocytes by increasing ATGL lipolysis is able to rescue significantly the mitochondrial and ER volumes without increasing lipid peroxidation. In contrast, blocking lipid droplet biogenesis in HFD nephrocytes via inactivation of DGAT1 triglyceride synthesis fails to rescue mitochondria and ER and also increases potentially cytotoxic lipid peroxidation. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 5. ATGL rescues mitochondria and macromolecule uptake of HFD nephrocytes.  SBF SEM quantifications of total endosome numbers . In line with this, both the dextran and albumin uptake of HFD nephrocytes were completely rescued by ATGL expression but not by DGAT1 knockdown . Importantly, DGAT1 knockdown was epistatic to ATGL expression with respect to nephrocyte dextran uptake . Hence, ATGL protects renal endocytic function via a mechanism requiring triglyceride substrates, rather than by any moonlighting activity of the enzyme. Together, these striking findings show that nephrocyte-specific ATGL expression is sufficient to ameliorate HFD-induced mitochondrial defects and to stimulate full rescue of endocytic function. ATGL rescue of HFD nephrocyte function requires Srl and Delg We reasoned that UAS-ATGL rescue of nephrocyte dysfunction could reflect restoration of HFD-induced down-regulation of the endogenous bmm/ATGL gene, which has been reported in whole adult flies . To test this possibility, we monitored ATGL gene expression using a bmm-GFP transcriptional reporter . Together with the ATGL rescue experiments, this suggests that down-regulation of ATGL expression could contribute to nephrocyte dysfunction on HFD. Interestingly, ATGL-GFP expression in HFD nephrocytes was restored to approximately STD levels by providing exogenous ATGL enzyme . Thus, ATGL in nephrocytes not only regulates mitochondria but may also regulate the transcription of its own gene, raising the question of whether these 2 ATGL functions are separate or linked. To address this, we manipulated peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1α  . Importantly, knockdown of PGC1α/Srl also decreased ATGL-GFP expression in STD nephrocytes . This finding suggests that a key transcriptional coactivator of mitochondrial genes, PGC1α, is required directly or indirectly to regulate the expression of the ATGL gene. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 6. Rescue of nephrocyte mitochondria and endocytosis on HFD requires PGC1α/Srl. . Strikingly, the degree of rescue of HFD mitochondrial volume with PQQ was comparable to that achieved via ATGL expression . The PQQ experiments rule out that PGC1α solely acts upstream of DGAT1-dependent triglyceride biosynthesis and, together with the GFP reporter analysis, suggest that a HFD-induced decrease in PGC1α expression/activity could down-regulate ATGL gene expression. Importantly, genetic knockdown of PGC1 α /Srl , or Delg , inhibited ATGL rescue of HFD nephrocyte mitochondrial volume . Srl knockdown also completely blocked ATGL rescue of nephrocyte dextran uptake, which remained at or slightly below the level that is observed in control genotype HFD animals . These pharmacological and genetic experiments together demonstrate that PGC1α is required for the ATGL rescue of HFD-induced deficits in nephrocyte mitochondria and endocytosis. Discussion This study establishes the first Drosophila model for HFD-induced CKD. Our results reveal that exposure to HFD elevates circulating fatty acids and induces renal defects in Drosophila that are strikingly similar to those observed in mammals. Key metabolic features of CKD in podocytes and proximal tubule cells are recapitulated in Drosophila nephrocytes including lipid droplet induction, a decrease in mitochondrial volume, as well as compromised endocytic uptake of albumin and other macromolecules. The powerful genetics and high-throughput possibilities of the Drosophila model open up a significant new avenue for in vivo mechanistic studies of CKD. We now discuss the mechanism by which HFD induces CKD-like dysfunction in Drosophila and how increased ATGL/Bmm expression rescues it. We also discuss how side-by-side functional comparisons of the triglyceride metabolic enzymes DGAT1 and ATGL provide a widely applicable strategy for clarifying the cellular functions of stress-induced lipid droplets. Boosting fatty acid flux through the triglyceride compartment protects renal endocytosis ATGL overexpression is predicted to increase the release of free fatty acids, a change that is associated with lipotoxicity. Nevertheless, we find that the outcome of this genetic manipulation can either be beneficial or harmful for renal endocytosis, depending upon whether it is adipose or nephrocyte specific. We showed that HFD induction of lipid droplets and endocytic dysfunction in nephrocytes are both mimicked on STD via overexpression of ATGL in adipose tissue. Furthermore, HFD induction of nephrocyte lipid droplets requires the Cubn endocytic receptor. Together with the finding that HFD elevates hemolymph fatty acids, these results suggest that excess diet-derived fatty acids are mobilised from adipose tissue into the circulation, taken up by nephrocytes via receptor-mediated endocytosis, and subsequently accumulate in the core of lipid droplets. A key finding of this study is that experimentally boosting the expression of ATGL in nephrocytes rescues most of the deleterious effects of HFD on the morphology and function of these cells. Thus, ATGL expression substantially restored ER volume, mitochondrial volume, endosomal number and, importantly, the endocytosis of dextran and albumin. This striking protection of nephrocyte endocytic function by ATGL is strictly dependent upon DGAT1, strongly suggesting that it requires fatty acid flux into and out of the lipid droplet triglyceride compartment. Our analysis also suggests that fatty acid flux through the triglyceride compartment is suboptimal on HFD because ATGL becomes limiting. The observation that HFD decreases nephrocyte ATGL reporter expression is indicative of repression at the transcriptional level. However, our results do not rule out an additional contribution to HFD repression of ATGL from posttranscriptional mechanisms. A general strategy for distinguishing between different lipid droplet functions Our systematic comparisons between 2 different genetic methods for inhibiting stress-induced lipid droplets have important implications for interpreting the role of these organelles in a wide range of different biological contexts. In the case of nephrocytes, we have shown that either blocking the last step of triglyceride synthesis . Dark endolysosomes with a luminal density similar to or higher than the cytoplasm were all Dextran − . Statistical analysis R version 3.5.1  Hemolymph abundances of myristic  Graphs quantify individual uptake  The 5 endolysosomal categories distinguished in CLEM analysis of Rab7 :: YFP myc STD nephrocytes subjected to dextran uptake assays. The criteria used were scanning EM luminal density  Confocal panels represent ratio of oxidised  Delg or Srl knockdown decreases mitochondrial volume in STD nephrocytes. Quantitation of mitochondrial volumes (as % of cell volume) of STD pericardial nephrocytes for control ( Dot>ctrl ), Dot>Delg[i] and Dot> Srl[i] larvae. ( B ) Confocal panels show 10-kDa and 500-kDa dextran uptake in ex vivo pericardial nephrocytes of control ( Dot>ctrl ) and Dot>ATGL; Srl[i] larvae on HFD. The dextran signals of both genotypes, imaged within the same field of view, are comparable. Graph shows small but significant decrease in 10-kDa and 500-kDa dextran uptake between control ( Dot>ctrl ) and Dot>ATGL; Srl[i] larvae on HFD. Note that in the absence of Srl knockdown, ATGL significantly increases dextran uptake on HFD. See S1 Data for details of p -values and the type of statistical model used for all graphs in this study. S2 Data provides the source data used for all graphs and statistical analyses. ATGL, adipose triglyceride lipase; HFD, high-fat diet; Srl, Spargel; STD, standard diet.  (TIF) S1 Data. Summary of statistical methods and analysis. For each main and supporting figures, the linear mixed models, statistical inference tests, and p -values are shown.  (XLSX) S2 Data. Source data. The numerical values used for all main and supporting figures and for the statistical analyses in S1 Data are provided.  (XLSX) S1 Movie. SBF SEM Z stack of a STD nephrocyte. Data were collected with a 0.2-μm step size and recorded at 20 fps. SBF SEM, serial blockface scanning electron microscopy; STD, standard diet.  (MOV) S2 Movie. SBF SEM Z stack of a HFD nephrocyte. Data were collected with a 0.2-μm step size and recorded at 20 fps. HFD, high-fat diet; SBF SEM, serial blockface scanning electron microscopy.  (MOV) S3 Movie. SBF SEM Z stack of a Dot>DGAT1[i] HFD nephrocyte. Data were collected with a 0.2-μm step size and recorded at 20 fps. DGAT1, diglyceride acyltransferase 1; HFD, high-fat diet; SBF SEM, serial blockface scanning electron microscopy.  (MOV) S4 Movie. SBF SEM Z stack of a Dot>ATGL HFD nephrocyte. Data were collected with a 0.2-μm step size and recorded at 20 fps. ATGL, adipose triglyceride lipase; HFD, high-fat diet; SBF SEM, serial blockface scanning electron microscopy.  (MOV) Acknowledgments We acknowledge Mathias Beller, R. Kühnlein, and the late Susan Abmayr and Suzanne Eaton for fly stocks and antibodies. Fly stocks were also obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (NIH P40OD018537), the Vienna Drosophila Research Centre, and the Kyoto Drosophila Genetic Resource. We thank the Crick Metabolomics STP, Clare Newell and Ian McGough for assistance with experiments as well as for helpful advice and discussions. We also thank Eva Islimye and Elisabeth Kamper for comments on the manuscript. For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. 