Transactive response DNA-binding Protein of 43 kDa , and the NMR assignments confirmed the presence of the α-helix in the central region of TDP-43 PrLD . In addition to the helical region, Li and colleagues have shown that aromatic residues within the GAroS segments outside the central region are also relevant to some extent to the assembly process . In order to interrogate the role of the helical component and the GAroS regions in the intrinsic aggregation of TDP-43 PrLD at pH 4, we analyzed peak intensities of the 1 H- 15 N HSQC spectrum. This strategy has been used to characterize the helix-driven aggregation pathway of TDP-43 PrLD upon droplet induction with salt at higher pH values [ 10 , 11 ]. The peak intensities observed for the first 1 H- 15 N HSQC spectra recorded within the first hour from sample preparation at 2 different concentrations , which is interpreted as shift from the monomeric toward the aggregate state mediated by helix–helix intermolecular interactions, in line with previous observations [ 9 – 12 ]. Over the course of approximately 20 hours, the greater signal intensity loss of the central region became more evident at both concentrations . A closer inspection of these data revealed that, in addition to the central region containing the helix, other signals show reductions in signal intensity. Although these are minor changes, they are consistently observed over time and at the 2 concentrations . In particular, we highlight the following stretches of hydrophobic residues: 4 Phe-Gly-rich motifs at positions 276 to 284, 288 to 290, 367 to 368, and 396 to 403; 1 Tyr-Ser-Gly motif at 373 to 376; and 2 Trp-Gly motifs at positions 384 to 386 and 411 to 413 . This result correlates very well with mutational analyses that showed that, in addition to the helical region, Phe283, Phe289  The 1 H- 15 N HSQC spectra of TDP-43 PrLD at pH 4 and 25°C , and we observed that the NMR samples contained aggregated material displaying extensive droplet formation . Overall, these findings evince that . Similarly, the GAroS region that is carboxyl terminus to the α-helix contains 6 aromatic residues, which can be grouped in the following sticker-and-spacers pairs: Tyr374–Trp385 . Therefore, our interpretation that the lower peak intensities in the 1 H- 15 N HSQC mapping to the GAroS regions resulted from intermolecular interactions driving the monomer to droplet transition  fits well within this stickers-and-spacers model for PrLD-containing proteins and is in agreement with the conformational evolution revealed by Trp fluorescence, as the wavelength of maximum Trp emission, which is high during the first 10 hours . In line with these observations, light scattering values were low at the beginning and sharply increased over the next several hours, approximately coinciding with the NMR signal loss . During this period, the scattering remains steady for several hours and then increases further after 1 day, suggesting the formation of 2 distinct assembled species. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. Droplet assembly is coupled to fibril formation. . Interestingly, Thioflavin T  and, consistent with the data presented, dense networks of fibrils were imaged by transmission electron microscopy . The observation of ThT-reactive droplets in 2 distinct samples that aggregated following the same mechanism, as uncovered by LSNMR , together with the imaging of the fibrils by TEM and the analysis of the conformational evolution, firmly establishes that TDP-43 PrLD fibril formation is coupled to droplets under these conditions. The above results evoke the recent work by Gui and colleagues, who used ThT fluorescence and confocal microscopy to provide direct visual evidence that fibrils from hnRNPA1—another protein with a PrLD—formed from induced protein droplets . A close inspection to both hnRNPA1 in Gui and colleagues’ paper and TDP-43 PrLD in the present work revealed a critical difference: Whereas ThT fluorescence shines from the droplet interior in hnRNPA1 aggregates, indicative of fibrils confined within the droplet interior, the TDP-43 PrLD fibrils seems to be present at the surface, but not inside the droplet. One distinctive advantage of confocal microscopy is the possibility of scanning the entire volume of a droplet, slice by slice, and this feature allowed us to look in closer detail at TDP-43 PrLD droplets. In Fig 3 , we provide direct visualization that fibrils are in the surface and not in the interior of the droplet. Furthermore, they seem to detach upon reaching a critical size . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. ThT-positive, TDP-43’s PrLD fibrils emerge from protein droplets. . We have then shown that this intrinsic aggregation pathway couples droplet formation with the accumulation of amyloid fibrils at the droplet surface/solvent interface. What structural factors drive the conversion of fibrils? During droplet assembly, Trp-Gly motifs are the most important residues in assisting the helical region [ 9 , 11 ]. In fibrils, previous cryo-EM and SSNMR studies with the TDP-43 PrLD . Thus, we ought to explore whether the symmetrically distributed aromatic residues within the TDP-43 PrLD GAroS would form part of the fibril core, by taking advantage of their unique structural signature in the NMR spectra. We analyzed the aggregated material that became invisible to LSNMR by means of SSNMR. Although full structure determination by SSNMR requires multiple samples with different labeling schemes and in large quantities , we could reconstitute a modest amount of the fibril conformation that formed at the droplet/solvent interface. Cross-Polarization Magic Angle Spinning  that remain static and rigid. No Trp residues could be detected in the characteristic region corresponding to aromatic 13 C nuclei , which unambiguously indicate that these motifs are immobilized within a fibrillar core containing β-rich segments, as evinced by distinctive cross-peaks in the Cα/Cβ serine region . This is reminiscent of structural models of other PrLD-containing fibrils, in which the amyloid core is formed by Ser/Gly/Aromatic-rich motifs . Unlike Trp residues, mutation of Phe residues to Gly did not abolish droplet initiation, as long as the Trp residues remained unchanged . This observation indicates that Phe-Gly motifs have distinct roles in the droplet and the fibril forms. While a structure determination is still in progress, for which we are optimizing the production of larger amount of samples with distinct labeling schemes, the 1D slices of the 2D data set already indicate that the signal from Phe/Tyr aromatic 13 C, Gly’s 13 Cα, and Ser’s 13 Cβ nuclei are unambiguously detectable under our experimental conditions . When the same experiment is recorded with a shorter mixing time, only intra-residual correlations are observed, supporting the build-up of sequential connectivities as the mixing time is increased . The GAroS regions of TDP-43 PrLD contains 6 Phe-Gly motifs, 3 of which exist as Phe-Gly-Ser triads  . There is also just 1 Tyr residue  . Tentatively, it seems reasonable to speculate that these motifs may be part of the structural core. Along this line, a recent cryo-EM structural model of fibrils from the entire PrLD of TDP-43 formed under conditions akin to those of the present work was posted in bioRxiv  after the submission of this manuscript. Interestingly enough, this cryo-EM study provides direct visual evidence that all Phe residues from the GAroS segment are present in the structure, as proposed here based on the unambiguous observation of various cross-peaks corresponding to Phe residues in the aromatic region of the 13 C- 13 C Dipolar Assisted Rotational Resonance . To further test the role of Phe residues within and outside the central region spanning residues 311 to 360, 2 TDP-43 PrLD variants were generated. In 1 variant, the 2 central Phe residues were substituted to Ala residues, that is F312A+F316A. In the other, all 6 Phe in the GAroS were mutated to Ala, that is F276A+F283A+F289A+F367A+F397A+F401A. When incubated in the presence of seeds from the SSNMR samples, the F313A+F316A variant formed aggregates, while the hexa-mutated F276A+F283A+F289A+F367A+F397A+F401A variant did not . This result unambiguously indicates that whereas the double mutation can be tolerated and incorporates into the fibril, the hexa-mutated variant cannot. This observation corroborates the creation of hydrophobic cores by Phe residues in the GAroS segments, highlighting the relevance of these motifs beyond the central helix in forming amyloid fibrils by the PrLD of TDP-43. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Fibrils from the PrLD of TDP-43 are stabilized by Phe-Gly motifs. . This suggests the reconstitution of alternative structures in the 2 studies, which we explain based on the droplet stage reported, rather than different pH conditions. The droplet environment enabled fibrillization at the droplet surface/solvent interface, and such fibril form was amplified by seeding soluble protein, as this strategy is commonly used to propagate selected amyloid conformations [ 34 – 36 ]. Shenoy and colleagues used a 4-mm rotor in their SSNMR study, for which they successfully prepared a large amount of fibrillar material, but did not inform the formation of droplets . This is reminiscent of the different outcomes observed in cryo-EM and SSNMR studies on fibrils from the TDP-43 PrLD : CBCA and fluorescence imaging . The latter were obtained by addition of 1 μL of 1mM ThT and laser excitation at 457 nm, following the protocol by Gui and colleagues . To confirm that the ThT-reactive species were amyloids, the samples were directly adsorbed onto carbon-coated 300-mesh copper grids and negatively stained by incubation with 2% uranyl-acetate for direct visualization by TEM on a JEOL JEM-1011 electron microscope equipped with a TVIPS TemCam CMOS. Images acquired at a magnification of 30,000x and an accelerating voltage of 1,000 kV. Fluorescence measurements Fluorescence measurements were performed using a photon-counting Jobin–Yvon Fluoromax-4 spectrofluorimeter equipped with emission and excitation polarizers and a Peltier temperature control device. Fluorescence spectra of TDP-43 PrLD were measured at 25°C using a 280-nm excitation wavelength and recording emission from 270 nm to 400 nm with a scan speed of one half second per nm and excitation and emission slit widths of 2 nm. Using this approach, the 90° light scattering can be obtained as the apparent emission at 280 nm, while the Trp maximum emission wavelength and intensity provides information on how polar the indole fluorophore’s environment is. Steady state anisotropy  in 1 mM CD 3 COOD  S1 Data. Numerical data for Figs 1 , 2 and S1 .  (XLSX) 