Does rhythmic neural activity merely echo the rhythmic features of the environment, or does it reflect a fundamental computational mechanism of the brain? This debate has generated a series of clever experimental studies attempting to find an answer. Here, we argue that the field has been obstructed by predictions of oscillators that are based more on intuition rather than biophysical models compatible with the observed phenomena. What follows is a series of cautionary examples that serve as reminders to ground our hypotheses in well-developed theories of oscillatory behavior put forth by theoretical study of dynamical systems. Ultimately, our hope is that this exercise will push the field to concern itself less with the vague question of “oscillation or not” and more with specific biophysical models that can be readily tested. Neural oscillations are a critical phenomenon in neuroscience. For a century, their implication and role have been studied in nearly every cognitive domain and species. Why is research on oscillations so pervasive throughout the field? First, because oscillatory behavior seems to be one of those exceedingly illusive universals of brain function. While these rhythms may occur at different timescales, their presence across brain regions and species is more the rule than the exception . Second, oscillatory dynamics are extremely well studied. Engineers and physicists have studied oscillators to build and understand physical phenomena long before neuroscientists grew interested in them [ 2 , 3 ]. A close look at their work could guide neuroscience toward an explanation of neural function and its consequences. Despite the potential advantages, it seems that at least a portion of the field is stuck in a loop, debating whether neural oscillations are or are not a useful concept worthy of study. On the one hand, there is a tendency to doggedly look for  The set of equations displayed in the figure, known as Stuart–Landau equations, goes through an HA bifurcation at λ = 0. For λ below this critical value, x. Simulations run with such a model demonstrate that the oscillator returns to its natural state as soon as the external stimulation ceases, without any of the expected reverberant behavior . Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 2. Simulations for different interactions of the neural oscillator with an external stimulus.  The oscillator receives a constant external input, and λ is top-down modified by the onset of the stimulus. Simulation parameters are ω nat = 2 π 4, γ = 1, k = 50, and s frequency. Therefore, searching for phase shifts at the stimulus frequency will lead to subpar results. Oscillators are not shape invariant This point has not often been considered in perceptual neuroscience, but it is an important one if we are to test the viability of an oscillator as a perceptual principle. In general, when considering how an oscillator might synchronize to a rhythmic input, one often assumes that the behavior should be similar across many different input shapes: whether the signal is a smooth violin note, a sharp pure tone, or something in between like speech. However, this feature has not been considered in enough detail regarding how it should affect the neural ability to synchronize to it. And yet, it can make a big difference. For example, consider the simulations run with the same model as in the previous subsection, which show that the neural response depends on the specific shape of the rhythmic stimulation . When the system is forced with a sinusoidal stimulus, it immediately synchronizes to the external frequency. However, when the stimulus has the same period . For example, a top-down mechanism could push the system across a bifurcation point, bringing the system into an oscillatory regime when it detects an external input. As soon as the stimulus disappears, the system goes back to its non-oscillatory regime by progressively decreasing the oscillation’s amplitude back toward rest . Alternatively, from a bottom-up perspective . Once the stimulation ceases, the system goes back to rest, oscillating at its natural frequency and progressively decreasing its amplitude toward zero. All in all, these simulations exemplify how, through different mechanisms, a quiescent system at rest can turn into an oscillatory regime during stimulus input and back again. The implication here then is that studies searching for ongoing fluctuations prior to the stimulus as proof of an oscillator may indeed be misguided. While the presence of rhythmic fluctuation in the baseline period may well be indicative of oscillatory behavior, the absence of these fluctuations does not indicate the absence of an underlying oscillator. Instead, oscillatory behavior should be defined by how the mechanism interacts with the stimulus while the stimulus is present, as we have sought to do in this essay. A corollary of the above is that stimulus input can change oscillator amplitude. The belief that an oscillator must constantly oscillate could invite the prediction that oscillators will maintain the same amplitude before and during stimulation and only shift in phase. Therefore, a change in amplitude would be indicative of an evoked response. Each of our simulations refute this concept: Amplitude change with stimulus input is a common feature of oscillatory behavior. Oscillators are not phase invariant An oscillator does not respond uniformly even to the same input at different moments in time. How an oscillator’s phase shifts in response to input is a function of its ongoing phase: a phenomenon typically known as the phase response curve or phase resetting curve  or that the phase will always be totally reset to 0 . Many of these examples present oscillators in this fashion as simplifications for didactic purposes. We do not suggest that the authors are unaware of this phenomenon. However, we feel that these simplifications are in danger of being taken too literally. The sensitivity of the PRC can have important consequences to the adaptability of an oscillator. The degree  using the same Stuart–Landau model from the previous simulations to show an example of how the model behaves in response to quasi-rhythmic stimuli. Each unit of stimulation is drawn from a Gaussian distribution, each centered in rhythmic fashion so that the expected locations of each tone would yield a perfectly rhythmic stimulus. The example stimulus shown in Fig 3A demonstrates that despite the deviations in timing of each stimulus from rhythmicity, the oscillator still peaks at the expected time of what would be the next tone. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 3. An oscillator can handle some irregularity. . One divergence between the models’ predictions is that, when forced with an external rhythmic signal, the linear model follows the external rhythm regardless of the forcing frequency . To distinguish between these quantitatively different behaviors, a useful analysis is to compute the phase difference between the output of the system and the forcing signal . If the empirical observation shows that when presented with an isochronous stimulus the phase difference between the stimulus and the brain signal remains constant, regardless of the external rhythm, the simplest model should be adopted. Since the linear model predicts the observations, there would be no justification to increase the complexity of the model by adding a nonlinearity. In this direction, we can point to several studies assessing the oscillator-like properties of the neural system using this kind of analysis [ 47 , 48 ]. Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Fig 4. Comparison between an oscillator and a non-oscillator–like systems. (a) Upper panel: set of equations defining the different models. An oscillator-like model (Stuart–Landau) on the left; a linear model on the right. Lower panel: system’s behavior for different frequency values ( ω ext ) of the external rhythmic signal ( S ). For the oscillator, the synchronization between the system and the external force vanishes when the external frequency departs from the internal one (gray area in the left panel); for the linear model, instead, synchrony exists regardless of the value adopted by the external frequency. (b) Behavior of the 2 models (blue traces; oscillator on the left, linear model on the right) for rhythmic inputs (magenta traces) of different frequencies (colored dots; red, yellow, and green correspond to ω ext = 4.5, 5, and 6.2 Hz, respectively). The lower panel displays in gray the time evolution of the phase difference between the system output and the corresponding input.  In general, the behavior of a neural oscillator will depend on the specific features of the dynamical system defining it and on the mechanisms through which it interacts with the external world—bottom-up, like Fig 1D , and/or top-down, like Fig 2A , where an internal parameter of the oscillator is modified by the external stimulus. Not all oscillators are alike Each oscillator oscillates in its own way, the way that each nonlinearity is nonlinear in its own way. Therefore, the claim that some neural system oscillates is akin to calling the system nonlinear: useful information but hardly a complete explanation. More specifics are required to meaningfully advance the field forward. Conversely, by ruling out any of the behaviors discussed here, an experimentalist has constrained the kind of oscillator, or other dynamical system, that could have performed this function. This is an important contribution. Still, we caution the field against ruling out one behavior and throwing out all possible oscillators along with it. Doing so may ultimately harm progress in the field. How then should the field move forward? We believe that rather than concerning ourselves with supporting or refuting neural oscillators, a more useful framework would be to focus our attention on the specific neural dynamics we hope to explain and to develop candidate quantitative models that are constrained by these dynamics. Furthermore, such models should be able to predict future recordings or be falsified by them. That is to say that it should no longer be sufficient to claim that a particular mechanism is or is not an oscillator but instead to choose specific dynamical systems to test. In so doing, we expect to overcome our looping debate and to ultimately develop—by means of testing many model types in many different experimental conditions—a fundamental understanding of cognitive processes and the general organization of neural behavior. Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank David Poeppel, Joan Orpella, and Luc Arnal for their comments and helpful discussion on early drafts of this work. 