Lateral flow devices . Using these data, we determined that, at 100 viral copies per ml . Ct, cycle threshold; RT-PCR, reverse transcription PCR; SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2.  Download: PPT PowerPoint slide PNG larger image TIFF original image Table 2. Pillar 2 PCR Ct values of confirmatory samples positive for SARS-CoV-2. The samples which tested positive on Lateral Flow device are in grey columns.  Sensitivity of lateral flow device in the student population by Ct value From our data, the LFD test yield is 2.8 per 10,000 . Using the LoD of 100 pfu/ml, we determined that this would correlate with an N gene Ct value of 30.8 plus one other gene target amplifying at a Ct <35. By applying this theoretical level of performance to the LFD, we determine that 99 of our positive samples would not be able to be detected by the Innova LFD given that the Ct value of N gene is above 30.8. This equates to 15.44% of our true positive RT-PCR samples would not be detected using the Innova LFD. This means that, theoretically, the Innova LFD  for all 641 positive samples in the Birmingham Turnkey lab (y-axis). Ct values for each of the targets (Orf1, N, S) are plotted, with a sample only called positive if at least 2 of the 3 targets have a Ct <35. The red line indicates the N gene Ct value equating to 100 viral copies/ml, the previously determined LoD for the Innova LFD. Ct, cycle threshold; LFD, Lateral Flow Device; LoD, Limit of Detection.  Discussion Expansion of mass testing for SARS-CoV-2 is an issue many countries are facing, with LFDs seen as a viable accompaniment to the gold standard of RT-PCR tests as a way to increase capacity and screen asymptomatic populations. The University of Birmingham deployed a purpose built testing facility in order to screen its student population before they travelled home in the lead up to the 2020 holiday period. A total of 7,183 students were tested over an 8-day period, with 2 positive tests; a prevalence of 0.03% (95% CI 0.02% to 0.10%). Approximately 10% of tests carried out across the study were sent to an onsite Pillar 2 testing lab (termed Turnkey) for RT-PCR validation. The validation, carried out using the ThermoFisher COVID-19 TaqPath assay, confirmed the 2 positive LFD results. This gave a false positive rate of rate 0%, therefore indicating a 100% (95% CI 99.48% to 100.00%) specificity of the test in this study. The high specificity rate suggests that what we are seeing are true positive samples, and this is exemplified in the recent report published by the DHSC suggesting an LFD specificity rate of 99.72% . There has been some controversy over sensitivity and specificity of the Innova LFD platform [ 13 , 14 ]. Importantly, the studies that are often cited in such controversies relied on RT-PCR analysis of a swab taken on a separate day, whereas our study analysed the same prepared sample that provided a positive LFD result. Swabbing technique can largely impact the accuracy of diagnostic platforms; research shows that the accuracy of RT-PCR testing is significantly increased when the swab is taken by a trained scientist (79%) when compared to swabs taken by members of the public (58%) . As such, a large part of the variation in sensitivity and specificity rates may be confounded by differences in swabbing technique, rather than by the technical limitations of the Innova LFD platform itself. From a public health perspective, our positive sample size was thankfully small; however, for a true validation of false positivity, an ideal dataset would include many more positive samples and, importantly, rely on a single swab to reduce variation. By screening samples that were deemed negative by LFD, RT-PCR validation detected 6 samples that were determined to be false negatives ( Table 1 ). This suggests a true prevalence of 0.86% (95% CI 0.40% to 1.86%) within the cohort tested and when extrapolating from these data, represents 60 potentially missed positive cases. Using this information, we explored the LOD for LFDs. Given the barriers to culturing SARS-CoV-2, we did not determine a viral titre for these samples; however, we correlated N gene Ct values with viral titre by using the Qnostics SARS-CoV-2 analytical Q-panel. This validated the limit of detection of Innova LFD devices as 100 pfu/ml, which correlated to an N gene Ct value of approximately 30. Unfortunately, the Qnostics panel contains irradiated virus which as a result cannot be detected on the Innova LFD, meaning a cross validation of the LoD could not be performed on matching material; however, our data are concordant with larger-scale studies which have comparatively reported the LoD of the Innova test [ 7 , 15 , 16 ]. Importantly, all of the false negative samples had N gene Cts above or close to 30 and therefore above or close to the limit of detection for the Innova LFDs. These may be representative of individuals at the very early or very late stages of infection, who may have a relatively lower titre of SARS-CoV-2 in the swabbed sites at the time the swab was taken. It is therefore imperative that individuals undergo regular, routine testing, to accurately remove infected individuals from community transmission pools. First reports of variants of concern (VOCs) were published following the closure of this test site in December; however, the UK VOC (also referred to as the Kent VOC) was known to be circulating in late September . Since then, numerous other VOCs have been identified through genomic sequencing of positive cases worldwide; most notably with in the UK with COVID-19 Genomics UK Consortium (COG-UK) . While this study did not look at VOCs specifically, research carried out by PHE showed that the Innova LFD platform could detect the UK VOC . Recent emergence of the South African VOC can also be detected on this platform . With these datasets in mind, we would suggest that both the UK and South African VOCs can be reliably detected using the Innova LFD platform but as more variants emerge, these will require their own rapid evaluation by relevant public health bodies in their respective countries. The caveat to this is whether the comparative Ct values and LOD are the same for SARS-CoV-2 variants as they are with the wild type, something out of scope in this project. Short of national restrictions, control of case numbers within a population relies heavily on diagnostic testing capacity. Multipronged approaches to mass testing using a suite of platforms including LFDs will be a huge benefit to public health and SARS-CoV-2 surveillance, provided the tests are deployed correctly and that public health messaging is clear and accurate. The Innova LFD device should “not” be considered as a green-light test—that is to say that a result from an LFD should not allow individuals to participate in an activity that they would otherwise not participate in, if their infective status was not known. The LFD device can provide an individual with an idea of their colonisation state “at that time,” but as shown by the limit of detection, individuals with a low associated N gene Ct (e.g., people at the start or end of an infection) may test negative. However, when used regularly, in the correct red-light fashion, LFDs can be a highly effective tool in reducing overall community burden, with a particular benefit to places of work and study and any other venues that would have a relatively high proportion of attendance despite potential COVID-secure restrictions. Conclusions Our data show that the Innova LFD can successfully detect SARS-CoV-2 infection in people with a viral titre above approximately 100 viral copies/ml. However, as determined at our site using the ThermoFisher COVID-19 TaqPath assay, it is incapable of detecting infection at comparable PCR Ct values of 30 and over. These levels of infection are indicative of very early or very late stages of infection, and as such, we would strongly recommend that LFD testing is used to screen people at very regular frequency and that a negative result should not be used to determine that someone is free from SARS-CoV-2 infection. Supporting information Raw PCR Ct values for all SARS-CoV-2–positive samples analysed in the University of Birmingham Pillar 2 testing lab between October 1 and November 5, 2020. Skip to fig share navigation Sheet 1 Share Download fig share S1 Table. Raw PCR Ct values for all SARS-CoV-2–positive samples analysed in the University of Birmingham Pillar 2 testing lab between October 1 and November 5, 2020.  (XLSX) 